Corals are colonial marine invertebrates within the class Anthozoa of the phylum Cnidaria, which typically form compact colonies of many identical individual polyps. Coral species include the important reef builders that inhabit tropical oceans and secrete calcium carbonate to form a hard skeleton. A coral "group" is a colony of very many genetically identical polyps, each polyp being a sac-like animal typically only a few millimeters in diameter and a few centimeters in height. Each polyp excretes an exoskeleton near the base, and over many generations, the colony thus creates a skeleton characteristic of the species which can measure up to several meters in size.

Coralls obtain most of their energy and nutrients from photosynthetic unicellular dinoflagellates of the genus Symbiodinium, commonly known as zooxanthellae, which give the coral color. These corals require sunlight and grow in clear, shallow water, typically at depths less than 60 meters (200 feet; 33 fathoms). Corals are major contributors to the physical structure of the coral reefs that develop in tropical and subtropical waters, such as the Great Barrier Reef off the coast of Australia. These corals are increasingly at risk of bleaching events where polyps expel the zooxanthellae in response to stress such as high water temperature or toxins.

Other corals do not rely on zooxanthellae and can live globally in much deeper water, such as the cold-water genus Lophelia which can survive as deep as 3,300 meters (10,800 feet; 1,800 fathoms). Some have been found as far north as the Darwin Mounds, northwest of Cape Wrath, Scotland, and others off the coast of Washington state and the Aleutian Islands.

The classification of corals has been discussed for millennia, owing to having similarities to both plants and animals. Aristotle's pupil Theophrastus described the red coral, korallion, in his book on stones, implying it was a mineral, but he described it as a deep-sea plant in his Enquiries on Plants. Pliny the Elder stated that several sea creatures including sea nettles and sponges "are neither animals nor plants, but are possessed of a third nature (tertia natura)". Petrus Gyllius copied Pliny, introducing the term zoophyta for this third group in his 1535 book On the French and Latin Names of the Fishes of the Marseilles Region; it is popularly but wrongly supposed that Aristotle created the term.

Presently, corals are classified as species of animals within the sub-classes Hexacorallia and Octocorallia of the class Anthozoa in the phylum Cnidaria. Hexacorallia includes the stony corals and these groups have polyps that generally have a 6-fold symmetry. Octocorallia includes blue coral and soft corals and species of Octocorallia have polyps with an eightfold symmetry, each polyp having eight tentacles and eight mesenteries. The group of corals is paraphyletic because the sea anemones are also in the sub-class Hexacorallia.

Delineation of coral species is challenging as hypotheses based on morphological traits contradict hypotheses formed via molecular tree-based processes. As of 2020, there are 2175 identified separate coral species, 237 of which are currently endangered, making distinguishing corals to be the utmost of importance in efforts to curb extinction. Adaptation and delineation continue to occur in species of coral to combat the dangers posed by the climate crisis.

Systematic studies of soft coral species have faced challenges due to a lack of taxonomic knowledge and a low rate in mutation of mitochondrial DNA. Environmental factors, such as rising temperatures and acid levels in our oceans, account for some speciation of corals in the form of species lost. Various coral species have heat shock proteins (HSPs) that are also in the category of DE across species. These HSPs help corals combat the increased temperatures they are facing which lead to protein denaturing, growth loss, and eventually coral death. Approximately 33% of coral species are on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s endangered species list and at risk of species loss.

Ocean acidification is threatening the continued species growth and differentiation of corals. Mutation rates of Vibrio shilonii, the reef pathogen responsible for coral bleaching, heavily outweigh the typical reproduction rates of coral colonies when pH levels fall. Corals are unable to mutate their HSPs and other climate change preventative genes to combat the increase in temperature and decrease in pH at a competitive rate to these pathogens responsible for coral bleaching, resulting in species loss.

Stony coral, also known as hard coral, polyps produce a skeleton composed of calcium carbonate to strengthen and protect the organism. This is deposited by the polyps and by the coenosarc, the living tissue that connects them. The polyps sit in cup-shaped depressions in the skeleton known as corallites. Colonies of stony coral are markedly variable in appearance; a single species may adopt an encrusting, plate-like, bushy, columnar, or massive solid structure, the various forms often being linked to different types of habitat, with variations in light level and water movement being significant.

The body of the polyp may be roughly compared in a structure to a sac, the wall of which is composed of two layers of cells. The outer layer is known technically as the ectoderm, the inner layer as the endoderm. Between ectoderm and endoderm is a supporting layer of gelatinous substance termed mesoglea, secreted by the cell layers of the body wall. The mesoglea can contain skeletal elements derived from cells migrated from the ectoderm.

In both stony and soft corals, the polyps can be retracted by contracting muscle fibers, with stony corals relying on their hard skeleton and cnidocytes for defense. Soft corals generally secrete terpenoid toxins to ward off predators. The polyps interconnect by a complex and well-developed system of gastrovascular canals, allowing significant sharing of nutrients and symbionts.

Polyps feed on various small organisms, including zooplankton and small fish, using tentacles to immobilize or kill prey using stinging cells called nematocysts. These cells carry venom which they rapidly release in response to contact with another organism. A dormant nematocyst discharges in response to nearby prey touching the trigger (Cnidocil), and a flap (operculum) opens and its stinging apparatus fires the barb into the prey. The venom is injected through the hollow filament to immobilize the prey; the tentacles then manoeuvre the prey into the stomach. Once the prey is digested, the stomach reopens, allowing the elimination of waste products and the beginning of the next hunting cycle.

Many corals form a symbiotic relationship with a class of dinoflagellate algae, zooxanthellae of the genus Symbiodinium, which can form as much as 30% of the tissue of a polyp. The main benefit of the zooxanthellae is their ability to photosynthesize, which supplies corals with the products of photosynthesis, including glucose, glycerol, and amino acids, which the corals can use for energy. Zooxanthellae also benefit corals by aiding in calcification, for the coral skeleton, and waste removal. In addition to the soft tissue, microbiomes are also found in the coral's mucus and (in stony corals) the skeleton, with the latter showing the greatest microbial richness.

The zooxanthellae benefit from a safe place to live and consume the polyp's carbon dioxide, phosphate, and nitrogenous waste. Stressed corals will eject their zooxanthellae, a process that is becoming increasingly common due to strain placed on coral by rising ocean temperatures. Mass ejections are known as coral bleaching because the algae contribute to coral coloration. Ejection increases the polyp's chance of surviving short-term stress and if the stress subsides, they can regain algae, possibly of a different species, at a later time. If the stressful conditions persist, the polyp eventually dies.

Corals can be both gonochoristic (unisexual) and hermaphroditic, each of which can reproduce sexually and asexually. Reproduction is coordinated by chemical communication. Corals predominantly reproduce sexually, with about 25% of hermatypic corals (reef-building stony corals) form single-sex colonies, while the rest are hermaphroditic. It is estimated that more than 67% of coral are simultaneous hermaphrodites.

Spawning occurs in the evening or at night, with 75% of all hermatypic corals "broadcast spawn" by releasing gametes—eggs and sperm—into the water where they meet and fertilize to spread offspring. Synchronous spawning is very typical on the coral reef, and often, all corals spawn on the same night even when multiple species are present. Synchronous spawning may form hybrids and is perhaps involved in coral speciation.

Environmental cues that influence the release of gametes into the water vary from species to species, such as temperature change, lunar cycle, day length, and possibly chemical signaling. Other factors that affect the rhythmicity of organisms in marine habitats include salinity, mechanical forces, and pressure or magnetic field changes. Mass coral spawning often occurs at night on days following a full moon, which can cause light-dependent reactions in protein.

Corals are a common example of an animal host whose symbiosis with microalgae can turn to dysbiosis, which is visibly detected as bleaching. Coral microbiomes have been examined in various studies, demonstrating how oceanic environmental variations, such as temperature, light, and inorganic nutrients, affect the abundance and performance of the microalgal symbionts, as well as calcification and physiology of the host.

Studies have also suggested that resident bacteria, archaea, and fungi contribute to nutrient and organic matter cycling within the coral, with viruses also possibly playing a role in structuring the composition of these members. The gammaproteobacterium Endozoicomonas is emerging as a central member of the coral's microbiome, with flexibility in its lifestyle. Given the recent mass bleaching occurring on reefs, corals will likely continue to be a useful and popular system for symbiosis and dysbiosis research.

Astrangia poculata, the northern star coral, is a temperate stony coral widely documented along the eastern coast of the United States. The coral can live with and without zooxanthellae (algal symbionts), making it an ideal model organism to study microbial community interactions associated with symbiotic state. However, the ability to develop primers and probes to more specifically target key microbial groups has been hindered by the lack of full-length 16S rRNA sequences. In 2019, Goldsmith et al demonstrated Sanger sequencing was capable of reproducing the biologically-relevant diversity detected by deeper next-generation sequencing, while also producing longer sequences useful to the research community for probe and primer design.

In summary, corals have a generalized life cycle via sexual reproduction, with planulae developing at the water's surface before descending to seek a hard surface on the benthos to attach and begin a new colony. Asexual reproduction offers benefits such as high reproductive rate, delaying senescence, and replacement of dead modules, as well as geographical distribution. Coral microbiomes have been studied extensively, showing how oceanic environmental variations, such as temperature, light, and inorganic nutrients, affect the abundance and performance of microalgal symbionts, as well as the calcification and physiology of the host. The gammaproteobacterium Endozoicomonas is emerging as a central member of the coral's microbiome, with flexibility in its lifestyle. Given the recent mass bleaching occurring on reefs, corals will likely continue to be a useful and popular system for symbiosis and dysbiosis research.

Corals are well-studied holobionts that include the coral itself, its symbiont zooxanthellae (photosynthetic dinoflagellates), as well as its associated bacteria and viruses. Co-evolutionary patterns exist for coral microbial communities and coral phylogeny. The coral's microbiome and symbiont influence host health, but the historic influence of each member on others is not well understood. Scleractinian corals have been diversifying for longer than many other symbiotic systems, and their microbiomes are known to be partially species-specific.

A study published in 2018 revealed evidence of phylosymbiosis between corals and their tissue and skeleton microbiomes. The coral skeleton, which represents the most diverse of the three coral microbiomes, showed the strongest evidence of phylosymbiosis. Coral microbiome composition and richness were found to reflect coral phylogeny, with interactions between bacterial and eukaryotic coral phylogeny influencing the abundance of Endozoicomonas, a highly abundant bacterium in the coral holobiont. However, host-microbial cophylogeny appears to influence only a subset of coral-associated bacteria.

Top-down and bottom-up control of microbiota structure in the coral holobiont are involved in the formation of reefs. Stable microbes may be introduced to the holobiont through horizontal or vertical transmission and persist in ecological niches within the coral polyp where growth (or immigration) rates balance removal pressures from biophysical processes and immune or ecological interactions. Transient microbes enter the holobiont from environmental sources (e.g., seawater, prey items, or suspension feeding) and removal rates exceed growth/immigration rates, resulting in a dynamic and high-diversity microbiota. Transient and stable populations compete for resources including nutrients, light, and space, and the outcome of resource-based competition (bottom-up control) ultimately determines population growth rate and ability to persist when subject to removal.

Coral reefs are extremely diverse marine ecosystems hosting over 4,000 species of fish, massive numbers of cnidarians, molluscs, crustaceans, and many other animals. Early corals first appeared in the Cambrian about 535 million years ago, and fossils are extremely rare until the Ordovician period, 100 million years later, when Heliolitida, rugose, and tabulate corals became widespread. Paleozoic corals often contained numerous endobiotic symbionts. Tabulate corals occurred in limestones and calcareous shales of the Ordovician period, with a gap in the fossil record due to extinction events at the end of the Ordovician.

Rugose or horn corals became dominant by the middle of the Silurian period, and during the Devonian period, corals flourished with more than 200 genera. Both rugose and tabulate corals became extinct in the Permian–Triassic extinction event 250 million years ago (along with 85% of marine species), and there is a gap of tens of millions of years until new forms of coral evolved in the Triassic.

Coral reefs, which are the oldest forms of marine life, have a rich biodiversity and are under significant threat from various environmental factors. These threats include coral mining, agricultural and urban runoff, pollution, overfishing, blast fishing, disease, and the digging of canals and access into islands and bays. In 1998, 16% of the world's reefs died due to increased water temperature, with approximately 10% of the world's reefs dead. About 60% of the world's reefs are at risk due to human-related activities, particularly in Southeast Asia, where 80% of reefs are endangered.

Climate change impacts coral ecosystems, with increasing sea surface temperatures in tropical regions causing major coral bleaching, death, and shrinking populations. Although coral are able to adapt and acclimate, it is uncertain if this evolutionary process will happen quickly enough to prevent major reduction of their numbers. Climate change also causes more frequent and more severe storms that can destroy coral reefs.

Annual growth bands in some corals, such as deep sea bamboo corals (Isididae), may be among the first signs of the effects of ocean acidification on marine life. Growth rings allow geologists to construct year-by-year chronologies, a form of incremental dating, which underlie high-resolution records of past climatic and environmental changes using geochemical techniques. Certain species form communities called microatolls, which offer a low-resolution record of sea level change and can be dated using radiocarbon dating.

Corals have large sexually-reproducing populations, but their evolution can be slowed by abundant asexual reproduction. Gene flow is variable among coral species, and gene flow cannot be counted on as a dependable source of adaptation. However, adaptation to climate change has been demonstrated in many cases, usually due to a shift in coral and zooxanthellae genotypes. In the Gulf of Mexico, cold-sensitive staghorn and elkhorn coral have shifted in location, with slower-growing but more heat-tolerant corals becoming more common.

Geochemical anomalies within the crystalline structures of corals represent functions of temperature, salinity, and oxygen isotopic composition. Geochemical analysis can help with climate modeling, such as the ratio of oxygen-18 to oxygen-16 (δ18O) as a proxy for temperature.

The strontium/calcium ratio anomaly and oxygen isotope anomaly are two examples of geochemical anomalies that can be attributed to coral geochemistry anomalies. The ratio of oxygen-18 to oxygen-16 (δ18O) is a proxy for temperature, while the strontium/calcium ratio anomaly is related to the ratio of oxygen-18 to oxygen-16 (δ18O).

In conclusion, coral reefs face numerous threats, including climate change, environmental stress, and the loss of biodiversity. To address these challenges, it is crucial to develop strategies to protect coral reefs and ensure their continued health and biodiversity.


Dolphins are aquatic mammals belonging to the infraorder Cetacea and belong to various families, including Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins), Platanistidae (Indian river dolphins), Iniidae (New World river dolphins), Pontoporiidae (brackish dolphins), and possibly extinct Lipotidae (baiji or Chinese river dolphin). There are 40 extant species named as dolphins. Dolphins range in size from the 1.7-metre-long Maui's dolphin to the 9.5 m (31 ft) and 10-tonne orca. They exhibit sexual dimorphism, with males being larger than females. Dolphins have streamlined bodies and modified limbs that are flippers. They are faster than seals but not as flexible as seals.

Dolphins use conical teeth to capture fast-moving prey and have well-developed hearing, which is adapted for both air and water. Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths and have a layer of fat under the skin to keep warm in cold water. Most species prefer warm waters of the tropic zones, while some, like the right whale dolphin, prefer colder climates. Dolphins feed largely on fish and squid, but a few, such as the orca, feed on large mammals such as seals.

Dolphins are sometimes hunted in places like Japan, known as dolphin drive hunting, and face threats from bycatch, habitat loss, and marine pollution. They have been depicted in various cultures worldwide and are sometimes kept in captivity and trained to perform tricks. The most common dolphin species in captivity is the bottlenose dolphin, while around 60 orcas are in captivity.

The term "dolphin" can be used to refer to most species in the Delphinidae family and the river dolphin families Iniidae, Pontoporiidae, Lipotidae, and Platanistidae. In the US, the term "whale" is used only for larger cetacean species, while smaller ones with a beaked or longer nose are considered "dolphins."

There are six species of dolphins commonly thought of as whales, collectively known as blackfish: the orca, the melon-headed whale, the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale, and the two species of pilot whales, all classified under the Delphinidae family. A group of dolphins is called a "school" or a "pod," with males called "bulls," females called "cows," and young dolphins called "calves."

Hybridization of dolphins has been a significant evolutionary development, with three hybrid dolphins found off the Irish coast in 1933. These hybrids were formed between Risso's and bottlenose dolphins, and their mating was repeated in captivity, producing a hybrid calf. Other dolphin hybrids live in captivity around the world or have been reported in the wild, such as a bottlenose-Atlantic spotted hybrid. The best known hybrid is the wholphin, a false killer whale-bottlenose dolphin hybrid. The wolphin is a fertile hybrid, with two currently living at the Sea Life Park in Hawaii.

Dolphins display convergent evolution with fish and aquatic reptiles. They are descendants of land-dwelling mammals of the artiodactyl order (even-toed ungulates) and are related to the Indohyus, an extinct chevrotain-like ungulate. The primitive cetaceans, or archaeocetes, first took to the sea approximately 49 million years ago and became fully aquatic by 5-10 million years later. Archaeoceti is a parvorder comprising ancient whales, stretching back to their first ancestor that spent their lives near (rarely) the water. Their features became adapted for living in the marine environment, with major anatomical changes including the hearing set-up that channeled vibrations from the jaw to the earbone, a streamlining of the body and the growth of flukes on the tail, migration of the nasal openings toward the top of the cranium, modification of the forelimbs into flippers, and shrinking and eventual disappearance of the hind limbs.

Today, the closest living relatives of cetaceans are the hippopotamuses, which share a semi-aquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls some 60 million years ago. Around 40 million years ago, a common ancestor between the two branched off into cetacea and anthracotheres, eventually leaving only one surviving lineage: the two species of hippo.

Dolphins have torpedo-shaped bodies with generally non-flexible necks, limbs modified into flippers, a tail fin, and bulbous heads. Dolphin skulls have small eye orbits, long snouts, and eyes placed on the sides of its head; they lack external ear flaps. Dolphins range in size from the 1.7 m (5 ft 7 in) long and 50 kg (110 lb) Maui's dolphin to the 9.5 m (31 ft 2 in) and 10 t (11 short tons) orca. They tend to be dwarfed by other Cetartiodactyls and have female-biased sexual dimorphism, with females being larger than males.

All dolphins have a thick layer of blubber, thickness varying on climate, which helps with buoyancy, protection, and energy for leaner times. Calves generally have a thin layer of blubber, which develops at different paces depending on the habitat. Dolphins have a two-chambered stomach similar in structure to terrestrial carnivores, fundic and pyloric chambers, and reproductive organs located inside the body.

The integumentary system is an organ system mostly consisted of skin, hair, nails, and endocrine glands. The skin of a dolphin is specialized to satisfy specific requirements, such as protection, fat storage, heat regulation, and sensory perception.

Dolphins have a unique body structure that includes a blubber, which is found within the dermis and subcutis layer. This fat, which is thickest on the back and belly, functions to streamline the body and form specialized locomotor structures such as the dorsal fin, propulsive fluke blades, and caudal keels. The thickness of the subcutaneous blubber depends on the dolphin's health, development, location, reproductive state, and how well it feeds.

The blubber also contains a fibrous network of connective tissue, which functions to streamline the body and form specialized locomotor structures such as the dorsal fin, propulsive fluke blades, and caudal keels. Dolphins are sensitive to vibrations and small pressure changes, and their blood vessels and nerve endings can be found within the dermis. There is a plexus of parallel running arteries and veins in the dorsal fin, fluke, and flippers.

The blubber manipulates the blood vessels to help the dolphin stay warm by constricting the blood vessels when the temperature drops, reducing blood flow in the dolphin and allowing the dolphin to spend less energy heating its own body. To release heat, the heat must pass the blubber layer. Thermal windows that lack blubber, are not fully insulated, and are somewhat thin and highly vascularized, including the dorsal fin, flukes, and flippers, are a good way for dolphins to get rid of excess heat if overheating. Additionally, dolphins use countercurrent heat exchange to conserve heat.

Dolphins are fast swimmers, with two pectoral flippers, a boneless dorsal fin for stability, and a tail fin for propulsion. They have skeletal anatomy that allows them to be fast swimmers, and all species have a dorsal fin to prevent themselves from involuntarily spinning in the water. Some dolphins are adapted for diving to great depths, selectively slowing their heart rate to conserve oxygen, and re-route blood from tissue tolerant of water pressure to the heart, brain, and other organs.

Dolphins have specific adaptations to the marine environment, such as their ear, which works as an impedance equalizer between the outside air's low impedance and the cochlear fluid's high impedance. Dolphins receive sound through the throat, which passes through a low-impedance fat-filled cavity to the inner ear. The ear is acoustically isolated from the skull by air-filled sinus pockets, allowing for greater directional hearing underwater.

Dolphins send out high frequency clicks from an organ known as a melon, which consists of fat, and the skull of any such creature containing a melon will have a large depression. This allows dolphins to use echolocation for orientation. Though most dolphins do not have hair, they do have hair follicles that may perform some sensory function. Echolocation also provides the animal with an idea on an object's shape and size, though how exactly this works is not yet understood.

A dolphin eye is relatively small for its size, yet they retain a good degree of eyesight. They have slightly flattened eyeballs, enlarged pupils, slightly flattened corneas, and a tapetum lucidum (eye tissue behind the retina), which allow for large amounts of light to pass through the eye and a very clear image of the surrounding area. They also have glands on the eyelids and outer corneal layer that act as protection for the cornea.

Dolphins do not have a good sense of smell, as their taste buds are atrophied or missing altogether. Some species have preferences for different kinds of fish, indicating some ability to taste.


Eels are ray-finned fish belonging to the order Anguilliformes, which consists of eight suborders, 20 families, 164 genera, and about 1000 species. They undergo considerable development from the early larval stage to the eventual adult stage and are usually predators. The term "eel" is also used for other eel-shaped fish, such as electric eels (genus Electrophorus), spiny eels (family Mastacembelidae), swamp eels (family Synbranchidae), and deep-sea spiny eels (family Notacanthidae).

Eels are elongated fish, ranging in length from 5 cm (2 in) in the one-jawed eel (Monognathus ahlstromi) to 4 m (13 ft) in the slender giant moray. Adults range in weight from 30 g (1 oz) to well over 25 kg (55 lb). They possess no pelvic fins, and many species also lack pectoral fins. The dorsal and anal fins are fused with the caudal fin, forming a single ribbon running along much of the length of the animal.

Most eels live in shallow waters of the ocean and burrow into sand, mud, or amongst rocks. Most eel species are nocturnal, and thus are rarely seen. Sometimes, they are seen living together in holes or "eel pits". Some eels also live in deeper water on the continental shelves and over the slopes deep as 4,000 m (13,000 ft). Only members of the Anguilla regularly inhabit fresh water, but they, too, return to the sea to breed.

The heaviest true eel is the European conger, with the maximum size of this species being reported as reaching a length of 3 m (10 ft) and a weight of 110 kg (240 lb). Other eels are longer, but do not weigh as much, such as the slender giant moray, which reaches 4 m (13 ft).

Eel eggs hatch firstly into the leptocephalus larval stage. As they transition from the ocean to fresh water, eels become glass eels and become elvers before finally seeking out their juvenile and adult habitats. As freshwater elvers, eels work their way upstream, and mature silver stage eels migrate back to the ocean to mate.

Several sets of classifications of eels exist, with some dividing eels into 20 families and others including additional eel families. Genetic studies indicate that there is a monophyletic group that originated among the deep-sea eels.




Jellyfish, also known as sea jellyfish, are the medusa-phase of certain gelatinous members of the subphylum Medusozoa, a major part of the phylum Cnidaria. These free-swimming marine animals have umbrella-shaped bells and trailing tentacles, which can pulsate to provide propulsion for highly efficient locomotion. The tentacles are armed with stinging cells and may be used to capture prey and defend against predators. Jellyfish have a complex life cycle, with the medusa being the sexual phase, producing planula larvae that disperse widely and enter a sedentary polyp phase before reaching sexual maturity.

Jellyfish are found all over the world, from surface waters to the deep sea. Scyphozoans (the "true jellyfish") are exclusively marine, but some hydrozoans with a similar appearance live in freshwater. Large, often colorful jellyfish are common in coastal zones worldwide. The medusae of most species are fast-growing, mature within a few months then die soon after breeding, but the polyp stage, attached to the seabed, may be much more long-lived. Jellyfish have been in existence for at least 500 million years, and possibly 700 million years or more, making them the oldest multi-organ animal group.

Jellyfish are eaten by humans in certain cultures, considered a delicacy in some Asian countries, and used in research, where the green fluorescent protein used by some species to cause bioluminescence has been adapted as a fluorescent marker for genes inserted into other cells or organisms. The stinging cells used by jellyfish to subdue their prey can injure humans, with thousands of swimmers worldwide being stung every year. When conditions are favourable, jellyfish can form vast swarms, which can be responsible for damage to fishing gear and sometimes clog the cooling systems of power and desalination plants.

The term jellyfish broadly corresponds to medusae, a life-cycle stage in the Medusozoa. Some authorities have called comb jellies and certain salps jellyfish, though other authorities state that neither of these are jellyfish, which they consider should be limited to certain groups within the medusozoa. Non-medusozoan clades called jellyfish by some but not all authorities are indicated with "???" on the following cladogram of the animal kingdom:

Cnidaria

Anthozoa (corals)

Polypodiozoa and Myxozoa (parasitic cnidarians)

Medusozoa

Acraspeda

Staurozoa (stalked jellyfish)

Rhopaliophora

Cubozoa (box jellyfish)

Scyphozoa

Discomedusae

Coronatae (crown jellyfish)

Hydrozoa

Aplanulata

Siphonophorae

Some Leptothecata

Filifera

Trachylinae

Limnomedusae

Narcomedusae

The subphylum Medusozoa includes all cnidarians with a medusa stage in their life cycle, including Scyphozoa (large jellyfish), Cubozoa (box jellyfish), and Hydrozoa (small jellyfish). The medusa form evolved after the polyp stage. Medusozoans have tetramerous symmetry, with parts in fours or multiples of four.

The four major classes of medusozoan Cnidaria are Scyphozoa, which are sometimes called true jellyfish, and Cubozoa, which have a rounded box-shaped bell and velarium that assists them in swimming more quickly. Hydrozoa medusae also have tetra-radial symmetry, a velum attached just inside the bell margin, and a smaller central stalk-like structure called the manubrium. Some Hydrozoa species maintain the polyp form for their entire life and do not form medusae at all, while others are entirely medusal and have no polyp form.

Staurozoa are characterized by a sessile medusa form, oriented upside down, and a stalk emerging from the apex of the "calyx" (bell). Some Staurozoa also have a polyp form that alternates with the medusoid portion of the life cycle. There are over 200 species of Scyphozoa, about 50 species of Cubozoa, and about 1000-1500 species that produce medusae.

Fossil history of jellyfish is rare, with the oldest unambiguous fossil being Burgessomedusa from the mid Cambrian Burgess Shale of Canada, likely a stem group of box jellyfish (Cubozoa) or Acraspeda (the clade including Staurozoa, Cubozoa, and Scyphozoa). Other claimed records from the Cambrian of China and Utah in the United States are uncertain and possibly represent ctenophores instead.

Anatomy of a true jellyfish is the umbrella-shaped bell, which is a hollow structure consisting of transparent jelly-like matter known as mesogloea. This mesogloea is bordered by the epidermis on the outside and the gastrodermis on the inside. The edge of the bell is often divided into rounded lobes called lappets, with dangling rudimentary sense organs known as rhopalia in the gaps or niches between the lappets.

The anatomy of scyphozoan jellyfish is similar to that of box jellyfish, with a squarish bell and a slender tentacles attached to each pedalium. The mouth opens into the gastrovascular cavity, where digestion takes place and nutrients are absorbed. The gastric cavity is subdivided by four thick septa into a central stomach and four gastric pockets. The gastric cavity is armed with nematocysts and enzyme-producing cells, which play a role in subduing and digesting prey.

The box jellyfish has a squarish, box-like bell with a short pedalium or stalk hanging from each of the four lower corners. Its rim is folded inwards to form a shelf known as a velarium, restricting the bell's aperture and creating a powerful jet when the bell pulsates, allowing box jellyfish to swim faster than true jellyfish. Hydrozoans are also similar, usually with just four tentacles at the edge of the bell, although many hydrozoans are colonial and may not have a free-living medusal stage.

Most jellyfish do not have specialized systems for osmoregulation, respiration, and circulation, and do not have a central nervous system. Nematocysts deliver the sting, and they do not need a respiratory system because sufficient oxygen diffuses through the epidermis. They have limited control over their movement but can navigate with the pulsations of the bell-like body.

Rhopalia contain rudimentary sense organs that detect light, water-borne vibrations, odour, and orientation. A loose network of nerves called a "nerve net" is located in the epidermis, and jellyfish detect stimuli and transmit impulses both throughout the nerve net and around a circular nerve ring. The rhopalial ganglia contain pacemaker neurones which control swimming rate and direction.

Box jellyfish have more advanced vision than other groups, with each individual having 24 eyes, two of which are capable of seeing color, and four parallel information processing areas that act in competition. The study of jellyfish eye evolution is an intermediary to a better understanding of how visual systems evolved on Earth. Major topics of jellyfish visual system research include the evolution of jellyfish vision from simple to complex visual systems, the eye morphology and molecular structures of box jellyfish, and various uses of vision including task-guided behaviors and niche specialization.

Experimental evidence for photosensitivity and photoreception in cnidarians dates back to the mid-1900s, and research has covered the evolution of visual systems in jellyfish. Jellyfish visual systems range from simple photoreceptive cells to complex image-forming eyes, with more ancestral visual systems incorporating extraocular vision (vision without eyes) and more derived visual systems comprising perception capable of multiple task-guided behaviors.

Cnidarian jellyfish have a "ring" nervous system that plays a significant role in motor and sensory activity, responsible for muscle contraction and movement. Photosensitive structures range from non-specialized groups of cells to more conventional eyes similar to vertebrates. The general evolutionary steps to develop complex vision include non-directional photoreception, directional photoreception, low-resolution vision, and high-resolution vision. Increased habitat and task complexity has favored the high-resolution visual systems common in derived cnidarians such as box jellyfish.

Basal visual systems observed in various cnidarians exhibit photosensitivity representative of a single task or behavior. Extraocular photoreception is the most basic form of light sensitivity and guides a variety of behaviors among cnidarians. Directional photoreception allows for more complex phototactic responses to light, likely evolved by means of membrane stacking.

Box jellyfish vision represents the most basic form of true vision, with multiple directional photoreceptors combining to create the first imaging and spatial resolution. This is different from the high-resolution vision observed in camera or compound eyes of vertebrates and cephalopods that rely on focusing optics. Box jellyfish possess "proper eyes" (similar to vertebrates) that allow them to inhabit environments that lesser derived medusae cannot. However, their lenses are functionally similar to cup-eyes exhibited in low-resolution organisms and have very little to no focusing capability.

Box jellyfish eyes are a sophisticated visual system with considerable variation within their morphology and molecular makeup, including photoreceptors, opsins, lenses, and synapses. Comparing these attributes to more derived visual systems can provide a deeper understanding of how the evolution of more derived visual systems may have occurred and how box jellyfish can serve as an evolutionary/developmental model for all visual systems.

Box jellyfish visual systems are diverse and complex, consisting of multiple photosystems. There is likely considerable variation in visual properties between species due to significant inter-species morphological and physiological variation. Eyes tend to differ in size, shape, number of receptors (including opsins), and physiology across species of box jellyfish. They have 24 eyes that fit into four different morphological categories: two large, morphologically different medial eyes (a lower and upper lensed eye) containing spherical lenses, a lateral pair of pigment slit eyes, and a lateral pair of pigment pit eyes. These eyes are situated on rhopalia (small sensory structures) which serve sensory functions of the box jellyfish and arise from the cavities of the exumbrella (the surface of the body) on the side of the bells of the jellyfish.

Box jellyfish eyes primarily use c-PRCs (ciliary photoreceptor cells) similar to that of vertebrate eyes. These cells undergo phototransduction cascades (process of light absorption by photoreceptors) that are triggered by c-opsins. Available opsin sequences suggest that there are two types of opsins possessed by all cnidarians, including an ancient phylogenetic opsin and a sister ciliary opsin to the c-opsins group. Box jellyfish could have both ciliary and cnidarian opsins, which is something not previously believed to appear in the same retina.

Comparative research on genetic and molecular makeup of box jellyfish's eyes versus more derived eyes seen in vertebrates and cephalopods focuses on lenses and crystallin composition, synapses, and Pax genes and their implied evidence for shared primordial (ancestral) genes in eye evolution. Box jellyfish eyes are said to be an evolutionary/developmental model of all eyes based on their evolutionary recruitment of crystallins and Pax genes. Research done on box jellyfish including Tripedalia cystophora has suggested that they possess a single Pax gene, PaxB, which functions by binding to crystallin promoters and activating them. PaxB in situ hybridization resulted in PaxB expression in the lens, retina, and statocysts.

All four of the visual systems of box jellyfish species investigated with detail (Carybdea marsupialis, Chiropsalmus quadrumanus, Tamoya haplonema, and Tripedalia cystophora) have invaginated synapses, but only in the upper and lower lensed eyes. Different densities were found between the upper and lower lenses, and between species. Four types of chemical synapses have been discovered within the rhopalia which could help in understanding neural organization.

The primary adaptive responses to environmental variation observed in box jellyfish eyes include pupillary constriction speeds in response to light environments, as well as photoreceptor tuning and lens adaptations to better respond to shifts between light environments and darkness. Interestingly, some box jellyfish species' eyes appear to have evolved more focused vision in response to their habitat. Pupillary contraction appears to have evolved in response to variation in the light environment across ecological niches across three species of box jellyfish (Chironex fleckeri, Chiropsella bronzie, and Carukia barnesi). Behavioral studies suggest that faster pupil contraction rates allow for greater object avoidance, and in fact, species with more complex habitats exhibit faster rates.

Light/dark adaptation via pupillary light reflexes is an additional form of an evolutionary response to the light environment. In the process of light/dark adaptation, the upper and lower lens eyes of different box jellyfish species vary in specific function. The lower lens-eyes contain pigmented photoreceptors and long pigment cells with dark pigments that migrate on light/dark adaptation, while the upper-lens eyes play a concentrated role in light direction and phototaxis given that they face upward towards the water surface (towards the sun or moon). Differences in visually guided behavior serve as evidence that species that share the same number and structure of eyes can exhibit differences in how they control behavior.

Jellyfish are a diverse group of marine animals that range from about one millimeter in bell height and diameter to nearly 2 meters in diameter. The smallest jellyfish are the creeping jellyfish in the genera Staurocladia and Eleutheria, which have bell disks from 0.5 millimeters to a few millimeters in diameter and short tentacles that extend out beyond this. They can reproduce asexually by fission (splitting in half). Other very small jellyfish with bells about one millimeter are the hydromedusae of many species that have just been released from their parent polyps. Some of these live only a few minutes before shedding their gametes in the plankton and then dying, while others will grow in the plankton for weeks or months.

The lion's mane jellyfish (Cyanea capillata) is one of the largest species, with fine, thread-like tentacles that may extend up to 36.5 m (119 ft 9 in) long. They have a moderately painful, but rarely fatal, sting. The increasingly common giant Nomura's jellyfish (Nemopilema nomurai) is another candidate for "largest jellyfish" in terms of diameter and weight, as the largest Nomura's jellyfish in late autumn can reach 2 m (6 ft 7 in) in bell diameter and about 200 kg (440 lb) in weight.

The rarely encountered deep-sea jellyfish Stygiomedusa gigantea is another candidate for "largest jellyfish", with its thick, massive bell up to 100 cm (3 ft 3 in) wide and four thick, "strap-like" oral arms extending up to 6 m (19+1⁄2 ft) in length. Desmonema glaciale, which lives in the Antarctic region, can reach a very large size (several meters). Purple-striped jelly (Chrysaora colorata) can also be extremely long (up to 15 feet).

Jellyfish have a complex life cycle that includes both sexual and asexual phases, with the medusa being the sexual stage in most instances. Sperm fertilize eggs, which develop into larval planulae, become polyps, bud into ephyrae, and then transform into adult medusae. In some species, certain stages may be skipped.

Upon reaching adult size, jellyfish spawn regularly if there is a sufficient supply of food. In most species, spawning is controlled by light, with all individuals spawning at about the same time of day. Jellyfish are usually either male or female (with occasional hermaphrodites). After an interval and stimulated by seasonal or hormonal changes, the polyp may begin reproducing asexually by budding, which is called a segmenting polyp or a scyphistoma in the Scyphozoa. Budding produces more scyphistomae and also ephyrae.

Limnomedusae polyps can asexually produce a creeping frustule larval form, which crawls away before developing into another polyp. A few species can produce new medusae by budding directly from the medusan stage. Some hydromedusae reproduce by fission.

Jellyfish have a long life span, with some species living for several years and others being immortal. They are highly efficient swimmers, using their bell-shaped bodies to push water behind them and creating two vortex rings. This passive energy recapture mechanism allows jellyfish to travel 30 percent farther on each swimming cycle, achieving a 48 percent lower cost of transport.

Jellyfish are carnivorous, feeding on planktonic organisms, crustaceans, small fish, fish eggs and larvae, and other jellyfish. They hunt passively using their tentacles as drift lines or sink through the water with their tentacles spread widely. Their swimming technique also helps them capture prey, with their bell expanding to suck in water and bringing more potential prey within reach. Some species, such as Aglaura hemistoma, are omnivorous, feeding on microplankton, mutualistic algae, and symbiotic relationships with microalgae.

Predation is common among other jellyfish species, including sea anemones, tunas, sharks, swordfish, sea turtles, and penguins. Jellyfish washed up on the beach are consumed by foxes, other terrestrial mammals, and birds. However, few animals prey on jellyfish; they can broadly be considered top predators in the food chain. Once jellyfish become dominant in an ecosystem, there may be no obvious way for the previous balance to be restored: they eat fish eggs and juvenile fish and compete with fish for food, preventing fish stocks from recovering.

Symbiosis exists between small fish that are immune to the stings of the jellyfish and live among the tentacles, serving as bait in a fish trap. The cannonball jellyfish has a symbiotic relationship with ten different species of fish and the longnose spider crab, which lives inside the bell, sharing the jellyfish's food and nibbling its tissues.

Jellyfish form large masses or blooms in certain environmental conditions, such as ocean currents, nutrients, sunshine, temperature, season, prey availability, reduced predation, and oxygen concentration. Currents collect jellyfish together, especially in years with unusually high populations. Jellyfish can detect marine currents and swim against the current to congregate in blooms. They are better able to survive in nutrient-rich, oxygen-poor water than competitors, feasting on plankton without competition. Rising sea temperatures caused by climate change may also contribute to jellyfish blooms, as many species of jellyfish are able to survive in warmer waters.

Jellyfish populations may be expanding globally due to land runoff and overfishing of their natural predators. They reproduce rapidly, prey upon many species, while few species prey on them, and feed via touch rather than visually. It may be difficult for fish stocks to re-establish themselves in marine ecosystems once they have become dominated by jellyfish, as jellyfish feed on plankton, which includes fish eggs and larvae.

Moon jellyfishes can live in northern hemisphere seas, such as the Baltic Sea. As suspected at the turn of this century, jellyfish blooms are increasing in frequency.


Lobsters are marine crustaceans with long bodies and muscular tails, living in crevices or burrows on the sea floor. They are highly prized as seafood and are economically important, often being one of the most profitable commodities in coastal areas they inhabit. Lobsters belong to the genus Nephrops and the genus Metanephrops, and are not closely related to spiny lobsters, slipper lobsters, or squat lobsters. The most similar living relatives of clawed lobsters are reef lobsters and the three families of freshwater crayfish.

Lobster anatomy includes two main body parts: the cephalothorax and the abdomen. The cephalothorax fuses the head and thorax, both of which are covered by a chitinous carapace. The lobster's head bears antennae, antennules, mandibles, the first and second maxillae, and the compound eyes. Lobsters mostly use their antennae as sensors, and their eyes have a reflective structure above a convex retina. The lobster's thorax is composed of maxillipeds, appendages that function primarily as mouthparts, and pereiopods, appendages that serve for walking and gathering food. The abdomen includes pleopods (also known as swimmerets), used for swimming, as well as the tail fan, composed of uropods and the telson.

Lobsters have blue blood due to the presence of hemocyanin, which contains copper, while vertebrates and many other animals have red blood from iron-rich hemoglobin. Lobsters possess a green hepatopancreas, called the tomalley by chefs, which functions as the animal's liver and pancreas. Lobsters of the family Nephropidae are similar in overall form to several other related groups. They differ from freshwater crayfish in lacking the joint between the last two segments of the thorax, and from the reef lobsters of the family Enoplometopidae in having full claws on the first three pairs of legs, rather than just one.

Coloring in lobsters can be dark, either bluish-green or greenish-brown, to blend in with the ocean floor, but they can be found in many colors. Atypical coloring is extremely rare, accounting for only a few of the millions caught every year. In cases of atypical coloring, there is a genetic factor, such as albinism or hermaphroditism. Special coloring does not appear to affect the lobster's taste once cooked; except for albinos, all lobsters possess astaxanthin, which is responsible for the bright red color lobsters turn after being cooked.

Lobster longevity is limited by their size, as moulting requires metabolic energy, and the larger the lobster, the more energy is needed. Moulting requires metabolic energy, and the larger the lobster, the more energy is needed; 10 to 15% of lobsters die of exhaustion during moulting, while in older lobsters, moulting ceases and the exoskeleton degrades or collapses entirely, leading to death. Lobster longevity allows them to reach impressive sizes, with Guinness World Records reporting the largest lobster ever caught in Nova Scotia, Canada, weighing 20.15 kilograms (44.4 lb).

Lobsters are marine animals that live in all oceans, with smaller, younger lobsters typically found in crevices or burrows under rocks and not typically migrating. Larger, older lobsters are more likely to be found in deeper seas, migrating back to shallow waters seasonally. They are omnivores and typically eat live prey such as fish, mollusks, other crustaceans, worms, and some plant life. They scavenge if necessary and are known to resort to cannibalism in captivity.

Lotters are 25–50 cm (10–20 in) long and move by slowly walking on the sea floor. They swim backward quickly when they flee by curling and uncurling their abdomens, known as the caridoid escape reaction. The first known instances of lobster cannibalism in the wild are theorized to be attributed to a local population explosion among lobsters caused by the disappearance of many of the Maine lobsters' natural predators.

Lotters are commonly served boiled or steamed in the shell, with the meat often eaten with melted butter and lemon juice. They are also used in soup, bisque, lobster rolls, cappon magro, and dishes such as lobster Newberg and lobster Thermidor. Cooks boil or steam live lobsters, and when a lobster is cooked, its shell's color changes from brown to orange because the heat from cooking breaks down a protein called crustacyanin, which suppresses the orange hue of the chemical astaxanthin, which is also found in the shell.

Lotter has a rich history dating back to early history, with large piles of lobster shells near areas populated by fishing communities attesting to the crustacean's extreme popularity during this period. Evidence indicates that lobster was being consumed as a regular food product in fishing communities along the shores of Britain, South Africa, Australia, and Papua New Guinea years ago. Lobster became a significant source of nutrients among European coastal dwellers and was a primary food source for coastal communities in Britain during this time.

During the mid to late Roman period, lobster became a popular mid-range delicacy, with evidence suggesting that lobster was regularly transported inland over long distances to meet popular demand. Lobster was also a popular food among the Moche people of Peru between 50 CE and 800 CE, and its shells were used to create a light pink dye, ornaments, and tools.

The Viking period saw an increase in lobster and other shellfish consumption among northern Europeans due to the overall increase in marine activity due to the development of better boats and increasing cultural investment in building ships and training sailors. Lobster, more than fish, became a food primarily available to the relatively well-off, at least among non-coastal dwellers.

Lotter was first mentioned in cookbooks during the medieval period, with Le Viandier de Taillevent, a French recipe collection written around 1300, suggesting that lobster should be cooked in wine and water, or in the oven, and eaten in vinegar. The French household guidebook Le Ménagier de Paris, published in 1393, includes no less than five recipes including lobster, indicating the popularity of lobster as a food among the upper classes.

During the early 1400s, lobster was a popular dish among the upper classes, with influential households using the variety and variation of species served at feasts to display wealth and prestige. Lobster was commonly found among these spreads, indicating that it continued to be held in high esteem among the wealthy. However, lobster was not a food exclusively accessed by the wealthy, as the general population living on the coasts made use of the various food sources provided by the ocean, and shellfish especially became a more popular source of nutrition. Lobster was generally eaten boiled during the mid-15th century, but the influence of the cuisine of higher society can be seen in that it was now regularly eaten cold with vinegar.

Lobster continued to be eaten as a delicacy and a general staple food among coastal communities until the late 17th century. The influence of the Church and the government regulating and sometimes banning meat consumption during certain periods encouraged the popularity of seafood, especially shellfish, as a meat alternative among all classes. From the late 17th century onward, developments in fishing, transportation, and cooking technology allowed lobster to more easily make its way inland, and the variety of dishes involving lobster and cooking techniques used with the ingredient expanded. However, these developments coincided with a decrease in the lobster population, and lobster increasingly became a delicacy food, valued among the rich as a status symbol and less likely to be found in the diet of the general population.

The American lobster was not originally popular among European colonists in North America due to the European inlander's association of lobster with barely edible salted seafood and a cultural opinion that seafood was a lesser alternative to meat that did not provide the taste or nutrients desired. Lobster was also commonly served in prisons, much to the displeasure of inmates.

Caught lobsters are graded as new-shell, hard-shell, or old-shell. New-shell lobsters have paper-thin shells and a worse meat-to-shell ratio, but the meat is very sweet. Hard-shell lobsters with firm shells but less sweet meat can survive shipping to Boston, New York, and even Los Angeles, so they command a higher price than new-shell lobsters. Old-shell lobsters, which have not shed since the previous season and have a coarser flavor, can be air-shipped anywhere in the world and arrive alive, making them the most expensive.

Killing methods and animal welfare include placing lobsters live in boiling water, splitting the lobster or severing the body in half lengthwise, or electrocution prior to cooking with a device called the CrustaStun. Since March 2018, lobsters in Switzerland need to be knocked out or killed instantly before they are prepared. Lobster aquaculture expanded around the year 2000 due to overfishing and high demand.



Octopuses are soft-bodied, eight-limbed molluscs belonging to the order Octopoda. The order consists of around 300 species and is grouped within the class Cephalopoda with squids, cuttlefish, and nautiloids. Octopuses have a complex nervous system and excellent sight, making them among the most intelligent and behaviorally diverse invertebrates. They inhabit various regions of the ocean, including coral reefs, pelagic waters, and the seabed. Most species grow quickly, mature early, and are short-lived.

Octopuses defend themselves against predators through various strategies, such as expulsion of ink, camouflage, threat displays, jet-skipping through water, hiding, and deceit. All octopuses are venomous, but only the blue-ringed octopuses are known to be deadly to humans. They appear in mythology as sea monsters like the Kraken of Norway, Akkorokamui of the Ainu, and possibly the Gorgon of ancient Greece. A battle with an octopus appears in Victor Hugo's book Toilers of the Sea, inspiring other works such as Ian Fleming's Octopussy.

Octopuses are eaten and considered a delicacy by humans in many parts of the world, especially the Mediterranean and Asian seas. The scientific Latin term octopus was derived from Ancient Greek ὀκτώπoυς (oktōpous), a compound form of ὀκτώ (oktō, "eight") and πoύς (pous, "foot"), itself a variant form of ὀκτάπoυς. The standard pluralized form of "octopus" in English is "octopuses," with the Ancient Greek plural ὀκτώπoδες, "octopodes" (/ɒkˈtɒpədiːz/), having also been used historically.

The giant Pacific octopus (Enteroctopus dofleini) is often cited as the largest known octopus species, with adults usually weighing around 15 kg (33 lb) and an arm span of up to 4.3 m (14 ft). The largest specimen of this species to be scientifically documented was an animal with a live mass of 71 kg (157 lb). Much larger sizes have been claimed for the giant Pacific octopus, with one specimen recorded as 272 kg (600 lb) with an arm span of 9 m (30 ft).

The smallest species is Octopus wolfi, which is around 2.5 cm (1 in) and weighs less than 1 g (0.035 oz).

The octopus is a marine reptile with a bilaterally symmetrical body, with the head and foot at one end of an elongated body. Its body consists of a thin outer epidermis with mucous cells and sensory cells, and a connective tissue dermis consisting largely of collagen fibers and various cells allowing color change. Most of the body is made of soft tissue, allowing it to lengthen, contract, and contort itself. The octopus can squeeze through tiny gaps, even larger species can pass through an opening close to 2.5 cm (1 in) in diameter.

The arms work as muscular hydrostats, containing longitudinal, transverse, and circular muscles around a central axial nerve. They can extend and contract, twist to left or right, bend at any place in any direction, or be held rigid. Each of the eight arms senses and responds to light, allowing the octopus to control the limbs even if its head is obscured.

Octopuses have large eyes at the top of the head, similar in structure to those of a fish, enclosed in a cartilaginous capsule fused to the cranium. The cornea is formed from a translucent epidermal layer, and the slit-shaped pupil forms a hole in the iris just behind the cornea. The lens is suspended behind the pupil, and photoreceptive retinal cells cover the back of the eye. The pupil can be adjusted in size; a retinal pigment screens incident light in bright conditions.

Some species differ in form from the typical octopus body shape, such as the Cirrina, which have stout gelatinous bodies with webbing that reaches near the tip of their arms, and two large fins above the eyes, supported by an internal shell. Fleshy papillae or cirri are found along the bottom of the arms, and the eyes are more developed.

Octopuses have a closed circulatory system, with three hearts: a systemic or main heart that circulates blood around the body and two branchial or gill hearts that pump it through each of the two gills. The systemic heart has muscular contractile walls and consists of a single ventricle and two atria, one for each side of the body. Blood vessels consist of arteries, capillaries, and veins, lined with a cellular endothelium. Much of the venous system is contractile, helping circulate the blood.

Octopuses are marine animals with a complex nervous system that allows them to move around and maintain their position. They have the highest brain-to-body mass ratios of all invertebrates, greater than many vertebrates. They have the same jumping genes as humans, implying an evolutionary convergence at molecular level. The nervous system is complex, with only part of it localized in their brain, which is contained in a cartilaginous capsule.

Octopuses have camera-like eyes that can distinguish the polarization of light. Colour vision appears to vary between species, with some species having a single photoreceptor protein, while others have multiple photoreceptor proteins. Opsins in the skin respond to different wavelengths of light and help the animals choose a coloration that camouflages them. Chromatophorores in the skin can respond to light independently of the eyes. An alternative hypothesis is that cephalopod eyes in species with only one photoreceptor protein may use chromatic aberration to turn monochromatic vision into colour vision, though this sacrifices image quality.

Attached to the brain are two organs called statocysts (sac-like structures containing a mineralized mass and sensitive hairs), which allow the octopus to sense the orientation of its body. They provide information on the position of the body relative to gravity and can detect angular acceleration. An autonomic response keeps the octopus's eyes oriented so that the pupil is always horizontal. Octopuses may also use the statocyst to hear sound. The common octopus can hear sounds between 400 Hz and 1000 Hz, and hears best at 600 Hz.

Octopuses have an excellent somatosensory system, with suction cups equipped with chemoreceptors so they can taste what they touch. Octopus arms move easily because the sensors recognize octopus skin and prevent self-attachment. However, they appear to have poor proprioceptive sense and must observe the arms visually to keep track of their position.

In summary, octopuses have a complex nervous system that allows them to move around and maintain their position. They have camera-like eyes that can distinguish the polarization of light and use their somatosensory system to detect sound. Their somatosensory system is excellent, and they have a unique ability to move around and maintain their position.

The ink sac of an octopus is located under the digestive gland and produces ink, which is stored in the sac. The ink is mixed with mucus to create a thick, dark blob that allows the animal to escape from predators. Cirrate octopuses usually lack the ink sac.

Octopuses are gonochoric and have a single, posteriorly-located gonad associated with the coelom. An optic gland creates hormones that cause the octopus to mature and age, stimulating gamete production. Environmental conditions such as temperature, light, and nutrition control the timing of reproduction and lifespan.

When octopuses reproduce, the male uses a specialized arm called a hectocotylus to transfer spermatophores (packets of sperm) from the terminal organ of the reproductive tract (the cephalopod "penis") into the female's mantle cavity. In most species, fertilisation occurs in the mantle cavity. Courtship is accompanied by changes in skin texture and color in the male.

A female giant Pacific octopus attaches strings of small fertilised eggs (10,000 to 70,000 in total) to rocks in a crevice or under an overhang. Here she guards and cares for them for about five months (160 days) until they hatch. In colder waters, it may take up to ten months for the eggs to completely develop. The female aerates them and keeps them clean; if left untended, many will die.

The eggs have large yolks, with cleavage (division) being superficial and a germinal disc developing at the pole. During gastrulation, the margins grow down and surround the yolk, forming a yolk sac, which eventually forms part of the gut. The dorsal side of the disc grows upward and forms the embryo, with a shell gland on its dorsal surface, gills, mantle, and eyes. The arms and funnel develop as part of the foot on the ventral side of the disc. The yolk is gradually absorbed as the embryo develops.

Octopus paralarvae hatch as paralarvae and are planktonic for weeks to months, depending on the species and water temperature. They feed on copepods, arthropod larvae, and other zooplankton, eventually settling on the ocean floor and developing directly into adults. Octopus species that produce larger eggs, such as the southern blue-ringed, Caribbean reef, California two-spot, Eledone moschata, and deep sea octopuses, hatch as benthic animals similar to the adults.

Octopuses have short lifespans, with some species completing their lifecycles in only six months. The Giant Pacific octopus, one of the two largest species of octopuses, usually lives for three to five years. Their lifespan is limited by reproduction, which begins with senescence, the breakdown of cellular function without repair or replacement. This process typically lasts from weeks to a few months, at most. Females begin laying eggs when they lay a clutch of eggs and spend all their time aerating and protecting them until they are ready to hatch. During senescence, an octopus does not feed and quickly weakens, leading to lesions and degeneracy. Most octopuses are effectively semelparous, making them effectively semelparous.

Octopuses live in every ocean, and different species have adapted to different marine habitats. Common octopuses inhabit shallow tide pools, while Hawaiian day octopus lives on coral reefs, argonauts drift in pelagic waters, Abdopus aculeatus mostly lives in near-shore seagrass beds, and some species are adapted to cold, ocean depths. Cirrate species are often free-swimming and live in deep-water habitats.

Most species are solitary when not mating, but a few occur in high densities and with frequent interactions, signaling, mate defending, and eviction of individuals from dens. The LPSO has been described as particularly social, living in groups of up to 40 individuals. Octopuses hide in dens, which are typically crevices in rocky outcrops or other hard structures, though some species burrow into sand or mud. They are not territorial but generally remain in a home range and may leave in search of food. They can navigate back to a den without having to retrace their outward route.

Octopuses bring captured prey to the den, where they can eat it safely. Sometimes the octopus catches more prey than it can eat, and the den is often surrounded by a midden of dead and uneaten food items. Other creatures, such as fish, crabs, molluscs, and echinoderms, often share the den with the octopus, either because they have arrived as scavengers or because they have survived capture. On rare occasions, octopuses hunt cooperatively with other species, with fish as their partners.

Feeding is a major mode of feeding for octopuses. Bottom-dwelling octopuses eat mainly crustaceans, polychaete worms, and other molluscs such as whelks and clams, while open-ocean octopuses eat prawns, fish, and other cephalopods. Major items in the diet of the giant Pacific octopus include bivalve molluscs, clams, scallops, and crustaceans. Small cirrate octopuses, such as Grimpoteuthis and Opisthoteuthis, typically prey on polychaetes, copepods, amphipods, and isopods.

Octopuses are a fascinating and intelligent species that have evolved to adapt to their environment and survive. They use various forms of locomotion, including slow crawling, jet propulsion, swimming, and crawling. They crawl on solid or soft surfaces, using their powerful arm muscles to push and pull suckers. Jet propulsion is the fastest means of locomotion, followed by swimming and crawling.

Cirrate octopuses, such as Adopus aculeatus and veined octopus (Amphioctopus marginatus), cannot produce jet propulsion and rely on their fins for swimming. They can also contract their arms and surrounding web to make sudden moves known as "take-offs." Another form of locomotion is "pumping," which involves symmetrical contractions of muscles in their webs producing peristaltic waves.

Octopuses are highly intelligent, with evidence of a memory system that can store both short- and long-term memory. They can be trained to distinguish between different shapes and patterns in laboratory experiments, practicing observational learning. They have also been observed in play, releasing bottles or toys into circular currents in their aquariums and then catching them. Octopuses often break out of their aquariums and sometimes into others in search of food.

Camouflage is another important aspect of octopuses' behavior. They use specialized skin cells to change the appearance of their skin by adjusting its color, opacity, or reflectivity. Chromatophores contain yellow, orange, red, brown, or black pigments, while other colour-changing cells are reflective iridophores and white leucophores. This color-changing ability is also used to communicate with or warn other octopuses.

Octopuses can create distracting patterns with waves of dark coloration across the body, known as the "passing cloud." Muscles in the skin change the texture of the mantle to achieve greater camouflage. Some species have the mantle take on the spiky appearance of algae, while others have more complex skin. Octopuses that are diurnal and live in shallow water have evolved more complex skin than their nocturnal and deep-sea counterparts.

A "moving rock" trick involves the octopus mimicking a rock and then inching across the open space with a speed matching that of the surrounding water.

In conclusion, octopuses are a fascinating and intelligent species that have evolved to adapt to their environment and survive. Their unique behaviors and camouflage strategies make them an attractive and adaptable species for various environments.

Octopuses are a group of cephalopods that can be preyed upon by various animals, including humans, fishes, seabirds, sea otters, pinnipeds, cetaceans, and other cephalopods. They typically hide or disguise themselves through camouflage and mimicry, with some having conspicuous warning coloration or deimatic behavior. An octopus may spend 40% of its time hidden away in its den, and when approached, it may extend an arm to investigate. Some species have scars, while others have amputated arms.

Octopuses can use distraction with an ink cloud ejected from the ink sac, which reduces the efficiency of olfactory organs and aids evasion from predators that employ smell for hunting. When under attack, some octopuses can perform arm autotomy, similar to how skinks and other lizards detach their tails. These severed arms remain sensitive to stimuli and move away from unpleasant sensations. Some octopuses can combine their highly flexible bodies with their colour-changing ability to mimic other, more dangerous animals, such as lionfish, sea snakes, and eels.

Pathogens and parasites that affect octopuses have been little studied, but they are known to be the intermediate or final hosts of various parasitic cestodes, nematodes, and copepods. 150 species of protistan and metazoan parasites have been recognized. Octopuses have an innate immune system, with haemocytes responding to infection by phagocytosis, encapsulation, infiltration, or cytotoxic activities to destroy or isolate the pathogens. Captive animals are more susceptible to pathogens than wild ones.

The scientific name Octopoda was first coined and given as the order of octopuses in 1818 by English biologist William Elford Leach. The Octopoda consists of around 300 known species and were historically divided into two suborders, the Incirrina and the Cirrina. Incirrate octopuses lack the cirri and paired swimming fins of cirrates and the internal shell of incirrates is either present as a pair of stylets or absent altogether.

Fossil history and phylogeny of octopuses are relatively rare, as they consist mostly of soft tissue and lack the external shell of most molluscs. Octopuses have eight limbs like other Coleoidea but lack the extra specialized feeding appendages known as tentacles.



Otters are carnivorous mammals in the subfamily Lutrinae, a branch of the Mustelidae family. The 13 extant species are all semiaquatic, aquatic, or marine, with diets based on fish and invertebrates. They are part of the Mustelidae family, which includes weasels, badgers, mink, and wolverines. The word otter derives from the Old English word otor or oter, which ultimately stems from the Proto-Indo-European root *wódr̥, which also gave rise to the English word "water."

An otter's den is called a holt, or couch. Male otters are called dogs or boars, females are called bitches or sows, and their offspring are called pups or cubs. The collective nouns for otters are bevy, family, lodge, romp (being descriptive of their often playful nature), or, when in water, raft.

The feces of otters are typically identified by their distinctive aroma, which has been described as ranging from freshly mown hay to putrefied fish; these are known as spraints. Otters live up to 16 years and are by nature playful, and frolic in the water with their pups. Their usual source of food is fish, and further downriver, eels, but it may sample frogs and birds.

Otters have long, slim bodies and relatively short limbs. Their most striking anatomical features are the powerful webbed feet used to swim and their seal-like abilities for holding breath underwater. Most have sharp claws on their feet and all except the sea otter have long, muscular tails. The 13 species range in adult size from 0.6 to 1.8 m (2.0 to 5.9 ft) in length and 1 to 45 kg (2.2 to 99.2 lb) in weight. They have very soft, insulated underfur, protected by an outer layer of long guard hairs. In cold waters, several otter species live in cold waters and have high metabolic rates to help keep them warm. In water as warm as 10 °C (50 °F), an otter needs to catch 100 g (3.5 oz) of fish per hour to survive. Most species hunt for three to five hours each day and nursing mothers up to eight hours each day.

Feeding for most otters is fish, often supplemented by frogs, crayfish, and crabs. Some otters are experts at opening shellfish, while others will feed on available small mammals or birds. Prey-dependence leaves otters very vulnerable to prey depletion. Sea otters are hunters of clams, sea urchins, and other shelled creatures.

Otters are active hunters, chasing prey in the water or searching the beds of rivers, lakes, or the seas. Most species live beside water, but river otters usually enter it only to hunt or travel, otherwise spending much of their time on land to prevent their fur becoming waterlogged. Sea otters are considerably more aquatic and live in the ocean for most of their lives.

Otters are playful animals and appear to engage in various behaviors for sheer enjoyment, such as making waterslides and sliding on them into the water. Different species vary in their social structure, some being largely solitary, while others live in groups.

Otters have been hunted for their pelts since at least the 1700s, with early methods including darts, arrows, nets, and snares. They have also been used in hunting for humans, with fishermen in southern Bangladesh breeding smooth-coated otters and using them to chase fish into their nets. A 2011 review by the IUCN/SSC Otter Specialist Group showed that otter attacks reported between 1875 and 2010 occurred most often in Florida, where human and otter populations have substantially increased since 2000, with the majority involving the North American otter. At least 42 instances of attack were found, including one resulting in death and another case of serious injury. Attacking otters had rabies in 36% of anecdotal reports. Animal welfare groups say that, unless threatened, otters rarely attack humans.

In Native American cultures, otters are considered totem animals. In Zoroastrian belief, the otter is held to be a clean animal belonging to Ahura Mazda and taboo to kill. In popular Korean mythology, it is told that people who see an otter (soodal) will attract 'rain clouds' for the rest of their lives. In the Buddhist Jataka tales, The Otters and The Wolf, two otters agreed to let a wolf settle their dispute in dividing their caught fish but it was taken away by the cunning wolf.

In Japanese folklore, otters are called "kawauso" (獺、川獺). In Japanese folklore, they fool humans in the same way as foxes (kitsune) and tanuki. In the Noto region, Ishikawa Prefecture, there are stories where they shapeshift into beautiful women or children wearing checker-patterned clothing. If a human attempts to speak to one, they will answer "oraya" and then "araya," and if anybody asks them anything, they say cryptic things like "kawai." There are darker stories, such as one from Kaga Province (now Ishikawa Prefecture) in which an otter that lives in the castle's moat shapeshifts into a woman, invites males, and then kills and eats them.

In the Edo period kaidan, essays, and legends of the Edo period, there are tales about strange occurrences like otters that shapeshift into beautiful women and kill men. In the Tsugaru region, Aomori Prefecture, they are said to possess humans and lose their stamina as if their soul has been extracted. They are also said to shapeshift into severed heads and get caught in fishing nets. In the Kashima District and the Hakui District in Ishikawa Prefecture, they are seen as a yōkai under the name kabuso or kawaso. They perform pranks like extinguishing the fire of the paper lanterns of people who walk on roads at night, shapeshifting into a beautiful woman of 18 or 19 years of age and fooling people, or tricking people and making them try to engage in sumo against a rock or a tree stump.

In China, like in Japan, there are stories where otters shapeshift into beautiful women in old books like In Search of the Supernatural and the Zhenyizhi Zhiyuan. In conclusion, otter hunting, domestication, and various religious and mythological beliefs contribute to the diverse and fascinating world of otters.




[18:12, 13/01/2024] Mota Harshvardhan: Penguins are aquatic flightless birds from the Sphenisciformes order of the Spheniscidae family, primarily found in the Southern Hemisphere. They have dark and white plumage and flippers for swimming, and feed on krill, fish, and squid. They have a spiny tongue and powerful jaws to grip slippery prey. They spend half their lives on land and the other half in the sea. The largest living species is the emperor penguin, with adults weighing 35 kg. The smallest species is the little blue penguin, also known as the fairy penguin. Larger penguins typically inhabit colder regions, while smaller ones inhabit temperate or tropical climates. Prehistoric penguin species were as tall or heavy as adult humans.

The Late Eocene period saw a diverse range of species in subantarctic regions, with at least one giant species found around 2,000 km south of the equator 35 million years ago. The word penguin first appeared in literature as a synonym for the great auk, which European explorers named after the great auk of the Northern Hemisphere. The etymology of the word penguin is still debated, with some dictionaries suggesting a derivation from Welsh pen, meaning 'head', and gwyn, 'white', suggesting the name was originally applied to the great auk. An alternative etymology links the word to Latin pinguis, meaning 'fat' or 'oil'. Support for this etymology can be found in the alternative Germanic word for penguin, fettgans, or 'fat-goose', and the related Dutch word vetgans. Adult male penguins are sometimes called cocks, females sometimes called hens, and a group of penguins on land is a waddle, while a group of penguins in the water is a raft.

The genus Pinguinus, which was used in scientific classification since 1871, is part of the family of auks (Alcidae) within the order of the Charadriiformes. The birds known as penguins were discovered later and named by sailors due to their physical resemblance to the great auk. However, they are not auks and are not closely related to the great auk. They were classified in 1831 by Charles Lucien Bonaparte in several distinct genera within the family Spheniscidae and order Sphenisciformes.

The number of extant penguin species is debated, with biodiversity varying between 17 and 20 living species, all in the subfamily Spheniscinae. Some sources consider the white-flippered penguin a separate Eudyptula species, while others treat it as a subspecies of the little blue penguin. The royal penguin is also unclear, and the status of the rockhopper penguins is also unclear. The number of penguin species is debated, with some sources treating the white-flippered penguin as a separate species, while others treat it as a color morph of the macaroni penguin.

The Spheniscinae subfamily includes modern penguins, including great penguins like Aptenodytes Miller, King penguin, Emperor penguin, Pygoscelis Wagler, and Gentoo penguin. Little penguins include Eudyptula Bonaparte, Spheniscus Brisson, Megadyptes Milne-Edwards, and Eudyptes Vieillot. Banded penguins include Spheniscus magellanicus, Humboldt penguin, Galápagos penguin, and African penguin. Megadyptes Milne-Edwards, 1880, and Eudyptes Vieillot, 1816, are crested penguins. Other fossil genera include Waimanu manneringi, Murwaimanu tuatahi, Sequiwaimanu roseae, Crossvallia unienwillia, Crossvallia waiparensis, Petradyptes stonehousei, Kaiika maxwelli, Kumimanu biceae, Kumimanu fordecyi, and Kuupou stilwelli. Advanced Sphenisciformes include Anthropornis nordenskjoldii, Anthropornis grandis, UCMP 321021, Palaeeudyptes antarcticus, Palaeeudyptes marplesi, Palaeeudyptes klekowskii, Palaeeudyptes gunnari, and Palaeeudyptes schlegeli. Palaeeudyptes antarcticus, Palaeeudyptes marplesi, Palaeeudyptes klekowskii, Palaeeudyptes gunnari, and Palaeeudyptes schlegeli.

Fossil genera include Waimanu manneringi, Murwaimanu tuatahi, Sequiwaimanu roseae, Crossvallia unienwillia, Petradyptes stonehousei, Kaiika maxwelli, Kumimanu biceae, Kumimanu fordecyi, Kumpoupou stilwelli, and Advanced Sphenisciformes. The fossil genera include Anthropornis nordenskjoldii, Anthropornis grandis, Palaeeudyptes antarcticus, Palaeeudyptes marplesi, Palaeeudyptes klekowskii, Palaeeudyptes gunnari, and Palaeeudyptes lopdelli. The fossil genera also include Palaeeudyptes antarcticus, Palaeeudyptes marplesi, Palaeeudyptes klekowskii, Palaeeudyptes gunnari, and Palaeeudyptes lopdelli.

The subfamily has been extensively studied and updated by various researchers, including Marples (1962), Acosta Hospitaleche (2004), and Ksepka et al. (2006).

In 2021, a list of extant species of extant genera was compiled, including Delphinornis larseni, Delphinornis gracilis, Delphinornis arctowskii, Mesetaornis polaris, Marambiornis exilis, Aprosdokitos mikrotero, Perudyptes devriesi, Eretiscus tonni, Palaeospheniscus patagonicus, Palaeospheniscus bergi, Paraaptenodytes antarcticus, Arthrodytes andrewsi, Madrynornis mirandus, Pachydyptes simpsoni, Pachydyptes ponderosus, Anthropodyptes gilli, Pseudaptenodytes macraei, Marambiornopsis sobrali, Icadyptes salasi, Kairuku waewaeroa, Kairuku grebneffi, Kairuku waitaki, Glenn Murray Kairuku, Playdyptes novaezealandiae, Playdyptes marplesi, and Inkayacu paracasensis. The list also includes extinct species of extant genera, such as Spheniscus megaramphus, Spheniscus urbinai, Spheniscus chilensis, Spheniscus muizoni, Pygoscelis grandis, Pygoscelis tyreei, Pygoscelis calderensis, Eudyptes atatu, Eudyptes warhami, Eudyptes calauina, Eudyptula wilsonae, Megadyptes antipodes richdalei, and Megadyptes antipodes waitaha. The list is arranged by species, with the exception of the species of Eudyptes atau, Eudyptes warhami, Eudyptula wilsonae, Megadyptes antipodes richdalei, and Megadyptes antipodes waitaha. The list is a comprehensive guide to the study and identification of extant species in the genus Delphinornis.

The taxonomy of Spheniscidae, a family of penguins, has been a subject of debate. Some species, such as Aptenodytes ridgeni, Dege hendeyi, Inguza predemersus, Duntroonornis parvus, Nucleornis insolitus, Marplesornis novaezealandiae, Korora oliveri, Paraptenodytes robustus, and Platypus amiesi, have been poorly understood. Others, like Tonniornis mesetaensis, Tonniornis minimum, Tereingaornis moisleyi, Wimanornis seymourensis, Orthopteryx gigas, Ichtyopteryx gracilis, Palaeoapterodytes ictus, and Psuedaptenodytes minor, have been re-examined and placed in Accipitridae or Aves incertae sedis.

The family name Spheniscidae was given by Charles Lucien Bonaparte from the genus Spheniscus, which comes from the Greek word "wedge" used for an African penguin's swimming flippers. Some recent sources apply the phylogenetic taxon Spheniscidae to what is now referred to as Spheniscinae, restricting the phylogenetic taxon Sphenisciformes to flightless taxa, and establish the phylogenetic taxon Pansphenisciformes as equivalent to the Linnean taxon Sphenisciformes, including any flying basal "proto-penguins" to be discovered eventually. The Early Oligocene genus Cruschedula was formerly thought to belong to Spheniscidae, but further examination in 1980 resulted in its placement as Aves incertae sedis.

The evolutionary history of penguins is well-researched and represents a showcase of evolutionary biogeography. However, the alpha taxonomy of many prehistoric forms still leaves much to be desired. Some seminal articles about penguin prehistory have been published since 2005, and the evolution of the living genera can be considered resolved by now. The basal penguins lived around the time of the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event in the general area of (southern) New Zealand and Byrd Land, Antarctica. Due to plate tectonics, these areas were less than 1,500 kilometres apart than they are today. The most recent common ancestor of penguins and their sister clade can be roughly dated to the Campanian–Maastrichtian boundary, around 70-68 mya. By the end of the Cretaceous, the penguin lineage must have been evolutionarily well distinct, though much less so morphologically.

The oldest known fossil penguin species is Waimanu manneringi, which lived in New Zealand's early Paleocene epoch around 62 million years ago. They were flightless birds with short wings for deep diving and swam on the surface using their feet. Perudyptes from northern Peru was dated to 42 million years ago, and an unnamed fossil from Argentina suggests that primitive penguins had spread to South America by the Bartonian (Middle Eocene) and were expanding into Atlantic waters.

During the Late Eocene and Early Oligocene, some lineages of gigantic penguins existed, with Nordenskjoeld's giant penguin being the tallest and New Zealand's giant penguin being the heaviest. Most extinct penguin species were traditionally placed in the paraphyletic subfamily called Palaeeudyptinae. However, recent discoveries suggest that there were at least two major extinct lineages, one or two closely related ones occurring in Patagonia and one other, which includes the paleeudyptines, occurring on most Antarctic and Subantarctic coasts.

The initial stage of penguin radiation was marked by significant size plasticity, with around 10 known species of penguins coexisting on Seymour Island, Antarctica, around 35 million years ago. It is unclear whether the gigantic palaeeudyptines constitute a monophyletic lineage or if gigantism evolved independently in a restricted Palaeeudyptinae and the Anthropornithinae. The oldest well-described giant penguin, Icadyptes salasi, occurred as far north as northern Peru about 36 million years ago. By the end of the Paleogene, the giant penguins disappeared around 25 million years ago, coincided with the spread of primitive toothed whales, such as the Squalodontoidea and Paraptenodytes. A new lineage, the Paraptenodytes, emerged in southernmost South America by that time, and the early Neogene saw the emergence of the Palaeospheniscinae, a gracile penguin morphotype, contributing to the penguin biodiversity of our time.

Modern penguins are divided into two clades and two basal genera with ambiguous relationships. The Spheniscinae, the oldest spheniscine lineage, likely originated in the latest Paleogene and likely grew in the oceans between Australia-New Zealand and Antarctica. The Spheniscinae were likely limited to their ancestral area, as Paleogene fossils from the Antarctic Peninsula and Patagonia have not been found. The earliest spheniscine lineages are those with the most southern distribution. The genus Aptenodytes is the basalmost divergence among living penguins, with bright yellow-orange neck, breast, and bill patches. They incubate by placing eggs on their feet and have almost naked chicks when they hatch. Pygoscelis contains species with a simple black-and-white head pattern, with an intermediate distribution centered on Antarctic coasts but extending northwards. These species resemble the common ancestor of the Spheniscinae, as their autapomorphies are pronounced adaptations related to their extreme habitat conditions.

Pygoscelis, a former genus of penguins, diverged during the Bartonian period, but the range expansion and radiation that led to present-day diversity likely occurred later. Spheniscus and Eudyptula, two genera of penguins, have a mostly Subantarctic distribution centered on South America, with some ranging far northwards. These species lack carotenoid coloration and are unique among living penguins by nesting in burrows. They likely radiated eastwards with the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, out of the ancestral range of modern penguins throughout the Chattian (Late Oligocene) period. The present-day diversity is the result of a Pliocene radiation, taking place 4-2 mya. The Megadyptes-Eudyptes clade, with its highest diversity in the New Zealand region, represents a westward dispersal. They have hairy yellow ornamental head feathers and partly red bills. These two genera diverged in the Middle Miocene, but the living species of Eudyptes are the product of a later radiation. The geographical and temporal pattern of spheniscine evolution corresponds closely to two episodes of global cooling documented in the paleoclimatic record.

The Priabonian period saw a decline in Antarctic habitat, leading to more suitable conditions for penguins in Subantarctic regions. The cold Antarctic Circumpolar Current, which began as a continuous circumpolar flow around 30 mya, facilitated the eastward expansion of Spheniscus to South America and beyond. However, there is no fossil evidence supporting crown radiation from the Antarctic continent in the Paleogene, although DNA studies suggest it. The Middle Miocene Climate Transition ended an interspersed period of slight warming, leading to abrupt cooling events at 8 mya and 4 mya. The emergence of most Subantarctic penguin species is likely due to these climate shifts. Penguin ancestry beyond Waimanu remains unknown and not well-resolved by molecular or morphological analyses. The strong adaptive autapomorphies of the Sphenisciformes and homoplasies in diving adaptations between penguins and grebes are also confounded. DNA sequence datasets do not agree in detail with each other. Penguins belong to a clade of Neoaves, which comprises "higher waterbirds" to distinguish them from the more ancient waterfowl.

Penguins belong to the group of birds known as the Pelecaniformes, which includes storks, rails, and seabirds. Their relationships within this group are less clear, with some suggesting a close relationship to Ciconiiformes or Procellariiformes. Some believe that penguin-like plotopterids may be a sister group of penguins, sharing a common ancestor with the Pelecaniformes. A 2014 analysis of whole genomes of 48 representative bird species concluded that penguins are the sister group of Procellariiformes, from which they diverged about 60 million years ago.

Puffins, distantly related to penguins, have similar characteristics to survive in Arctic and sub-Arctic environments. They have a white chest, black back, and short stubby wings, but unlike penguins, they can fly. Their similarities indicate that similar environments, although at great distances, can result in similar evolutionary developments, i.e. convergent evolution.

Penguin wings have the same general bone structure as flighted birds, but the bones are shorter and stouter to serve as fins. They have taxidermized penguin skin and are well-adapted to aquatic life.

Penguins, despite their flippers in their wings, are agile underwater birds that maintain balance and buoyancy through their smooth plumage. They use their tails and wings to maintain balance, and all penguins are countershaded for camouflage. They have black backs and wings with white fronts, making predators difficult to distinguish between their white belly and the water surface. Gentoo penguins are the fastest underwater birds, reaching speeds of up to 36 km per hour and diving to depths of 170-200 meters. Emperor penguins are the world's deepest-diving birds, diving to depths of approximately 550 meters. They can also waddle on their feet or slide on their bellies across snow, using their feet to propel and steer themselves. They can also jump with both feet together for faster movement or cross steep or rocky terrain. The dark plumage on their backs helps them camouflage themselves from above.

Penguins have an average sense of hearing, which is used by parents and chicks to locate each other in crowded colonies. Their eyes are adapted for underwater vision, helping them locate prey and avoid predators. Penguins have a thick layer of insulating feathers that keep them warm in water, with a maximum feather density of about nine feathers per square centimeter. They have at least four different types of feathers: afterfeathers, plumules, and filoplumes. Afterfeathers are downy plumes that attach directly to the main feathers, while plumules are small down feathers that attach directly to the skin. Filoplumes are small naked shafts that end in a splay of fibers, which were once believed to give flying birds a sense of where their plumage was and whether it needed preening. The emperor penguin has the largest body mass, reducing relative surface area and heat loss. They can also control blood flow to their extremities, reducing the amount of cold blood but keeping them from freezing.

In the Antarctic winter, females fish for food, leaving males to brave the cold. They huddle together and rotate positions to keep warm. Most extant penguins are too small to survive in such cold environments. They utilize a "heterothermic loophole" to survive in Antarctica, which is a counter-current heat exchanger called the humeral plexus. The flippers of penguins have at least three branches of the axillary artery, which allows cold blood to be heated by warmed blood and limits heat loss from the flippers. This system allows penguins to efficiently use their body heat, allowing them to survive in extreme cold.

Penguins can drink salt water due to their supraorbital gland filtering excess salt from the bloodstream. The great auk of the Northern Hemisphere, now extinct, was superficially similar to penguins and is an example of convergent evolution. Isabelline penguins, born with brown plumage, live shorter lives than normal penguins due to their lack of camouflage and being often passed over as mates.

Most penguin species are native to the Southern Hemisphere, but they are not found only in cold climates like Antarctica. Only a few species live far south, such as the Galápagos penguin, which lives as far north as the Galápagos Islands due to the cold, rich waters of the Antarctic Humboldt Current. Despite the similar climates of the Arctic and Antarctic regions, penguins are not found in the Arctic. Some authors suggest that penguins are an example of Bergmann's Rule, where larger-bodied populations live at higher latitudes.

There is disagreement about the hypothesis that latitude alone has influenced penguin species diversity, with some authors arguing that fossil penguin species contradict this hypothesis. Ocean currents and upwellings are likely to have had a greater effect on species diversity than latitude alone. Major penguin populations are found in Angola, Antarctica, Argentina, Australia, Chile, Namibia, New Zealand, and South Africa. Satellite images in 2018 show that the population of 2 million in France's remote Ile aux Cochons has collapsed, with barely 200,000 remaining.

Penguins breed in large colonies, with the exception of yellow-eyed and Fiordland species. These colonies result in high social interaction between birds, leading to a large repertoire of visual and vocal displays in all penguin species. Agonistic displays are intended to confront or drive off conflict with other individuals.

Penguins form monogamous pairs for a breeding season, with most laying two eggs in a clutch, except for the emperor and king penguins. All penguins share incubation duties, with incubation shifts lasting days and even weeks as one member of the pair feeds at sea.

Penguins typically lay one brood, with the exception of the little penguin, which can raise multiple broods. Their eggs are smaller than other bird species, with the little penguin egg being 4.7% of its mothers' weight and the emperor penguin egg being 2.3%. The egg's shell is thick, reducing dehydration effects and minimizing breakage risk. The yolk is large, comprising 22-31% of the egg, and some yolk remains after a chick is born to help sustain it. Emperor penguin mothers may attempt to "steal" another mother's chick, but this is usually unsuccessful. In some species, chicks assemble in large groups called crèches, indicating their importance in the ecosystem.
[18:15, 13/01/2024] Mota Harshvardhan: Puffer, any of about 90 species of fishes of the family Tetraodontidae, noted for their ability when disturbed to inflate themselves so greatly with air or water that they become globular in form. Puffers are found in warm and temperate regions around the world, primarily in the sea but also, in some instances, in brackish or fresh water. They have tough, usually prickly skins and fused teeth that form a beaklike structure with a split in the centre of each jaw. The largest puffers grow about 90 centimetres (3 feet) long but most are considerably smaller.

Japanese puffer fish (Fugu rubripes).
Japanese puffer fish (Fugu rubripes).
Many species are poisonous; a highly toxic substance, tetraodontoxin, is especially concentrated in the internal organs. Although this substance can cause death, puffers are sometimes used as food. In Japan, where the fishes are called fugu, they must be carefully cleaned and prepared by a specially trained chef.

Sea otter (Enhydra lutris), also called great sea otter, rare, completely marine otter of the northern Pacific, usually found in kelp beds. Floats on back. Looks like sea otter laughing. saltwater otters
Britannica Quiz
Animal Group Names
Related to the puffers are about 12 species, also capable of inflating themselves, known as the sharp-nosed puffers. These fishes, which comprise the genus Canthigaster and the family Canthigasteridae, are found throughout the world. They are small fishes with rather long, pointed snouts and, unlike the puffers, inconspicuous nostrils. They are brightly coloured and no more than about 20 centimetres long. Like some puffers, they are sometimes kept in marine aquariums.

[18:17, 13/01/2024] Mota Harshvardhan: Stingrays are a group of cartilaginous fish related to sharks, classified in the suborder Myliobatoidei of the order Myliobatiformes. They consist of eight families: Hexatrygonidae (sixgill stingray), Plesiobatidae (deepwater stingray), Urolophidae (stingarees), Urotrygonidae (round rays), Dasyatidae (whiptail stingrays), Potamotrygonidae (river stingrays), Gymnuridae (butterfly rays) and Myliobatidae (eagle rays). There are about 220 known stingray species organized into 29 genera.

Stingrays are common in coastal tropical and subtropical marine waters worldwide. Some species, such as the thorntail stingray (Dasyatis thetidis), are found in warmer temperate oceans, while others, like the deepwater stingray (Plesiobatis daviesi), are found in the deep ocean. River stingrays and a number of whiptail stingrays (such as the Niger stingray (Fontitrygon garouaensis)) are restricted to fresh water. Most myliobatoids are demersal, but some, such as the pelagic stingray and the eagle rays, are pelagic.

Stingray species are progressively becoming threatened or vulnerable to extinction, particularly as a consequence of unregulated fishing. As of 2013, 45 species have been listed as vulnerable or endangered by the IUCN. The status of some other species is poorly known, leading to their being listed as data deficient.

Stingrays diverged from their closest relatives, the panrays, during the Late Jurassic period and diversified over the course of the Cretaceous into the different extant families today. The earliest stingrays appear to have been benthic, with the ancestors of the eagle rays becoming pelagic during the early Late Cretaceous.

Fossils of stingray teeth have been found in sedimentary deposits around the world as far back as the Early Cretaceous. The oldest known stingray taxon is "Dasyatis" speetonensis from the Hauterivian of England, whose teeth most closely resemble that of the extant sixgill stingray (Hexatrygon). Full-body stingray fossils are very rare but are known from certain lagerstättes that preserve soft-bodied animals.

Stingray anatomy includes a dorsal (topside) ← → ventral (underside) jaw and teeth, modified placoid scales, and spiracles. The respiratory system of stingrays is complicated by having two separate ways to take in water to use oxygen. Most stingrays take in water using their mouth and then send the water through the gills for gas exchange. However, the mouth cannot be used when hunting because the stingrays bury themselves in the ocean sediment and wait for prey to swim by.

Stingrays are a type of fish with flattened bodies that enable them to conceal themselves in their environments. They use smell and electroreceptors, similar to those of sharks, to detect prey after capture. They often settle on the bottom while feeding, leaving only their eyes and tails visible. Coral reefs are favorite feeding grounds and are usually shared with sharks during high tide.

Reproduction is associated with their behavioral endocrinology, with male stingrays relying on their ampullae of Lorenzini to sense certain electrical signals given off by mature females before potential copulation. Males may follow females closely, biting at her pectoral disc and placing one of their two claspers into her valve. This behavior is similar to the species Urobatis halleri, but differs in the specific actions of Hypanus sabinus. Seasonal elevated levels of serum androgens coincide with the expressed aggressive behavior, leading to the proposal that androgen steroids start, indorse, and maintain aggressive sexual behaviors in male rays for this species, driving the prolonged mating season.

Stingrays are ovoviviparous, bearing live young in "litters" of five to thirteen. During this period, the female's behavior transitions to support her future offspring. Females hold embryos in the womb without a placenta, absorb nutrients from a yolk sac, and provide uterine "milk." After birth, the offspring generally disassociate from the mother and swim away, having been born with instinctual abilities to protect and feed themselves. In some species, like the giant freshwater stingray (Urogymnus polylepis), the mother "cares" for her young by having them swim with her until they are one-third of her size.

Locomotion is another important aspect of stingray behavior. The stingray uses its paired pectoral fins for moving around, which can be divided into undulatory and oscillatory locomotion. Stingrays use a wide range of feeding strategies, including specialized jaws for crushing hard mollusk shells or external mouth structures called cephalic lobes to guide plankton into their oral cavity. They also exhibit a wide range of colors and patterns on their dorsal surface to help them camouflage with the sandy bottom.

Most stingrays feed primarily on mollusks, crustaceans, and small fish. Freshwater stingrays in the Amazon feed on insects and break down their tough exoskeletons with mammal-like chewing motions. Large pelagic rays like the manta use ram feeding to consume vast quantities of plankton and have been seen swimming in acrobatic patterns through plankton patches.

Injuries to stingrays can occur due to various factors, such as overfishing, overfishing, and overfishing.

Stingrays, also known as the spinal blade, are a type of marine reptile that can cause injuries to humans. They are not usually aggressive and typically attack humans when provoked, such as when they are accidentally stepped on. The stinger, located in the mid-area of the tail, can secrete venom, which can cause local trauma, pain, swelling, muscle cramps, and infection from bacteria or fungi. The injury is painful but rarely life-threatening unless the stinger pierces a vital area.

The venom of stingrays is relatively unstudied due to the mixture of venomous tissue secretions cells and mucous membrane cell products that occurs upon secretion from the spinal blade. The spine is covered with the epidermal skin layer, and during secretion, the venom penetrates the epidermis and mixes with the mucus to release the venom on its victim. The stingray is notable in that it stores its venom within tissue cells, with toxins such as cystatins, peroxiredoxin, and galectin. These toxins induce cell death in its victims and inhibit defense enzymes, leading to increased blood flow in superficial capillaries and cell death in humans.

The venom is produced and stored in the secretory cells of the vertebral column at the mid-distal region, housed within the ventrolateral grooves of the spine. Both marine and freshwater stingrays have round stinging cells, with the former branching out beyond the lateral grooves to cover a larger surface area along the entire blade. The venom of freshwater stingrays has a greater toxicity than that of marine stingrays.

Stingrays are edible and can be caught as food using fishing lines or spears in many coastal areas worldwide. In Malaysia and Singapore, stingrays are commonly grilled over charcoal and served with spicy sambal sauce. The most prized parts of the stingray are the wings, the "cheek" (the area surrounding the eyes), and the liver.

Ecotourism involves interacting with southern stingrays at Stingray City in the Cayman Islands, where they are usually docile and curious. Some larger species may be more aggressive and should be approached with caution, as their defensive reflex may result in serious injury or death. Some stingray species are commonly seen in public aquarium exhibits and home aquaria.
[18:18, 13/01/2024] Mota Harshvardhan: **Sea urchins are spiny, globular echinoderms in the class Echinoidea, found in every ocean and depth zone from the intertidal seashore down to 5,000 meters. They have spherical, hard shells (tests) that are round and covered in spines, with most urchin spines ranging in length from 3 to 10 cm (1 to 4 in). Sea urchins move slowly, crawling with tube feet and propelling themselves with their spines. They eat algae, slow-moving animals, and a wide variety of fish, starfish, crabs, marine mammals, and humans.

Like all echinoderms, adult sea urchins have fivefold symmetry, but their pluteus larvae feature bilateral (mirror) symmetry, indicating that they belong to the Bilateria, along with chordates, arthropods, annelids, and molluscs. 






[18:18, 13/01/2024] Mota Harshvardhan: **Sea urchins are spiny, globular echinoderms in the class Echinoidea, found in every ocean and depth zone from the intertidal seashore down to 5,000 meters. They have spherical, hard shells (tests) that are round and covered in spines, with most urchin spines ranging in length from 3 to 10 cm (1 to 4 in). Sea urchins move slowly, crawling with tube feet and propelling themselves with their spines. They eat algae, slow-moving animals, and a wide variety of fish, starfish, crabs, marine mammals, and humans.

Like all echinoderms, adult sea urchins have fivefold symmetry, but their pluteus larvae feature bilateral (mirror) symmetry, indicating that they belong to the Bilateria, along with chordates, arthropods, annelids, and molluscs. They are found in every o…
[18:20, 13/01/2024] Mota Harshvardhan: Seahorses are small marine fish species in the genus Hippocampus, which comes from the Ancient Greek words "híppos" meaning "horse" and "kámpos" meaning "sea monster" or "sea animal." They are found in shallow tropical and temperate salt water worldwide, with four species found in Pacific waters from North America to South America, Hippocampus erectus in the Atlantic, and H. zosterae in the Bahamas.

Three species live in the Mediterranean Sea: H. guttulatus (long-snouted seahorse), H. hippocampus (short-snouted seahorse), and H. fuscus (the sea pony). These species form territories, with males staying within 1 m2 of habitat and females over about one hundred times that.

Seahorses have an equine appearance, with bent necks, long snouted heads, and a distinctive trunk and tail. They swim upright, propelling themselves using the dorsal fin, a characteristic not shared by their close pipefish relatives. Razorfish are the only other fish that swim vertically. Their prehensile tail is composed of square-like rings that can be unlocked only in the most extreme conditions. Seahorses are adept at camouflage and can grow and reabsorb spiny appendages depending on their habitat.

Anatomical evidence, supported by molecular, physical, and genetic evidence, demonstrates that seahorses are highly modified pipefish. The fossil record of seahorses is very sparse, with the best known specimens being Hippocampus guttulatus from the Marecchia River formation of Rimini Province, Italy, dating back to the Lower Pliocene, about 3 million years ago. The earliest known seahorse fossils are of two pipefish-like species, H. sarmaticus and H. slovenicus, from the coprolitic horizon of Tunjice Hills, a middle Miocene lagerstätte in Slovenia, dating back about 13 million years.

Molecular dating implies that pipefish and seahorses diverged during the Late Oligocene, leading to speculation that seahorses evolved in response to large areas of shallow water created as a result of tectonic events. These tectonic changes occurred in the western Pacific Ocean, pointing to an origin there, with molecular data suggesting two later, separate invasions of the Atlantic Ocean. In 2016, a study published in Nature found the seahorse genome to be the most rapidly evolving fish genome studied so far.

The evolution of seahorses from pipefish may have been an adaptation related to the biomechanics of prey capture, as their unique posture allows them to capture small shrimps at larger distances than the pipefish is capable of.

Seahorses have a life-cycle consisting of four phases: initial courtship, pointing and pumping, and mid-water copulation. The male seahorse has a brood pouch on the ventral side of the tail, and during mating, the female seahorse deposits up to 1,500 eggs in the male's pouch. The male carries the eggs for 9 to 45 days until the seahorses emerge fully developed but very small. The young are then released into the water, and the male often mates again within hours or days during the breeding season.

Before breeding, seahorses may court for several days, synchronizing their movements and reproductive states. They may change color, swim side by side holding tails or gripping the same strand of sea grass with their tails, and wheel around in unison in a "predawn dance." They eventually engage in a "true courtship dance" lasting about 8 hours, during which the male pumps water through the egg pouch on his trunk, which expands and opens to display its emptiness. When the female's eggs reach maturity, she and her mate let go of any anchors and drift upward snout-to-snout, out of the sea grass, often spiraling as they rise. They interact for about 6 minutes, reminiscent of courtship.

Seahorses exhibit four phases of courtship, indicated by clear behavioral changes and changes in the intensity of the courtship act. Phase 1 occurs in the early morning one or two days before physical copulation, where potential mates brighten in color, quiver, and display rapid side-to-side body vibrations. The following phases occur sequentially on the day of copulation. Phase 2 is marked by the female pointing, a behavior in which the female raises her head to form an oblique angle with her body. In phase 3, males also begin the same pointing behavior in response to the female.

In summary, seahorses have a unique life-cycle that involves four phases of courtship. The initial phase, characterized by brightening, quivering, and pointing, occurs about 30 minutes after dawn on each courtship day until the day of copulation. The second phase, pointing and pumping, begins with the female brightening and assuming the pointing position, followed by a latency period.

The final courtship phase of seahorses involves 5-8 bouts of courtship, with both male and female anchored to the same plant about 3 cm apart. During the first bout, the male and female rise upward together in a water column, and during the final rise, the female inserts her ovipositor and transfers her eggs through an opening into the male's brood pouch.

Fertilization occurs in Hippocampus kuda, where the brood pouch is open for only six seconds while egg deposition occurs. This hyperosmotic environment facilitates sperm activation and motility, reducing sperm competition among males. Within the Syngnathidae (pipefishes and seahorses), protected fertilization has not been documented in pipefishes, but the lack of distinct differences in the relation of testes size to body size suggests that pipefishes may have evolved mechanisms for more efficient fertilization with reduced sperm competition.

Gestation occurs in the pouch, where fertilized eggs are embedded in the pouch wall and become surrounded by a spongy tissue. The pouch provides oxygen, a controlled environment incubator, and additional nutrients such as energy-rich lipids and calcium to build their skeletal system. Male sea horses also offer immunological protection, osmoregulation, gas exchange, and waste transport.

The number of young released by the male seahorse averages 100–1000 for most species, but may be as low as 5 for smaller species or as high as 2,500. When the fry are ready to be born, the male expels them with muscular contractions and typically gives birth at night. Less than 0.5% of infants survive to adulthood, explaining why litters are so large. These survival rates are fairly high compared to other fish due to their protected gestation, making the process worth the great cost to the father.

Reproductive roles in seahorses are energetically costly to the male, leading to questions about why sexual role reversal even takes place. Bateman's principle suggests that the lesser contributor takes the role of the aggressor, with male seahorses being more aggressive and sometimes fighting for female attention. Researchers chemically analyzed the energy stored in each egg and found that the female's energy expenditure while generating eggs is twice that of males during incubation.

Male seahorses have the potential to produce 17% more offspring than females in a breeding season, and females have "time-outs" from the reproductive cycle 1.2 times longer than males. To protect against losing a clutch, the female demands a long courtship and daily greetings to cement the bond between the pair.

Seahorses are a diverse group of marine mammals that have evolved to adapt to their environment and survive in various environments. They are known to form pair bonds that last through at least the breeding season, with some species showing higher levels of mate fidelity than others. However, many species readily switch mates when the opportunity arises, such as H. abdominalis and H. breviceps, which breed in groups without continuous mate preference.

The mate-guarding hypothesis suggests that males remain with a single female due to ecological factors that make male parental care and protection of offspring especially advantageous. This hypothesis could be explained by the lengthy period females require to produce their eggs, as males may incubate while females prepare the next clutch, reducing the interval between clutches.

Seahorses rely on stealth to ambush small prey, such as copepods, using pivot feeding to catch the copepod. They use their long snouts to eat their food with ease, but they are slow to consume their food and have extremely simple digestive systems that lack a stomach, so they must eat constantly to stay alive. They anchor themselves to seaweed, coral, or anything else that will keep the seahorse in place using their prehensile tails to grasp their object of choice.

Seahorses have three distinctive feeding phases: preparatory, expansive, and recovery. In the preparatory phase, the seahorse slowly approaches the prey while in an upright position, after which it slowly flexes its head ventrally. In the expansive phase, the seahorse captures its prey by simultaneously elevating its head, expanding the buccal cavity, and sucking in the prey item.

The amount of available cover influences the seahorse's feeding behavior. For example, in wild areas with small amounts of vegetation, seahorses will sit and wait, while in aquarium settings with little vegetation, they will fully inspect their environment and make no attempt to sit and wait.

Threats of extinction include the loss of seahorses due to data gaps on population sizes, annual mortality rates, birth rates, and souvenir use. Some species, like the paradoxical seahorse, H. paradoxus, may already be extinct. Coral reefs and seagrass beds are deteriorating, reducing viable habitats for seahorses, and bycatch in many areas causes high cumulative effects on seahorses, with an estimated 37 million individuals being removed annually over 21 countries.

Seahorses, collected from the wild, often suffer from stress and disease due to their limited diet and susceptibility to disease. Captive breeding has gained popularity in recent years, as seahorses survive better in captivity and are less likely to carry diseases. They eat frozen mysidacea, which are readily available from aquarium stores and do not experience the stress of moving out of the wild.

Seahorses should be kept in an aquarium with low flow and placid tank mates, as they are slow feeders and can coexist with many species of shrimp and other bottom-feeding creatures. Keepers are advised to avoid eels, tangs, triggerfish, squid, octopus, and sea anemones. Water quality is crucial for the survival of seahorses in an aquarium, and they should not be added to a new tank. The water parameters recommended for seahorses include temperature (23-28 °C), pH (8.1-8.4), ammonia (0 mg/L), nitrite (0 mg/L), and S.G. (1.021–1.024 at 23–24 °C (73–75 °F).

The "freshwater seahorses" sold as "freshwater seahorses" are usually closely related pipefish, with some species living in the lower reaches of rivers. The supposed true "freshwater seahorse" called H. aimei is not a valid species but a synonym sometimes used for Barbour's and hedgehog seahorses.

Seahorses are also used in Chinese medicine, particularly for impotence, wheezing, nocturnal enuresis, pain, and labor induction. Up to 20 million seahorses may be caught each year for such uses. The import and export of seahorses have been controlled under CITES since May 2004, but Indonesia, Japan, Norway, and South Korea have chosen to opt out of the trade rules set by CITES.

The growth of pills and capsules as the preferred method of ingesting seahorses may exacerbate the problem, as pills are cheaper and more available than traditional, individually tailored prescriptions of whole seahorses. Dried seahorses retail for US$600 to $3000 per kilogram, with larger, paler, and smoother animals commanding the highest prices.




Sharks are a group of elasmobranch fish characterized by a cartilaginous skeleton, five to seven gill slits on the sides of the head, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. They are classified within the clade Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the Batoidea (rays and kin). Some sources extend the term "shark" as an informal category including extinct members of Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fish) with a shark-like morphology, such as hybodonts.

Sharks range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (Etmopterus perryi), a deep sea species that is only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 meters (40 ft) in length. They are found in all seas and are common to depths up to 2,000 meters (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater, although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river shark, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater.

Sharks have a covering of dermal denticles that protects their skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth. Several species are apex predators, organisms that are at the top of their food chain. Some species are caught by humans for shark meat or shark fin soup. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities, with shark populations having been reduced by 71% since 1970, mostly from overfishing.

The etymology of the word shark is uncertain, but the most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk, meaning 'villain, scoundrel'. A now disproven theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xook (pronounced [ʃoːk]), meaning'shark'.

Sharks belong to the superorder Selachimorpha in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group, but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.

The superorder Selachimorpha is divided into Galea (or Galeomorphii) and Squalea (or Squalomorphii). The Galeans are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. The Squaleans are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha, which includes cow shark and frilled shark, and the Hypnosqualea, which includes the Squatiniformes and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batoidea.

There are over 500 species of sharks, divided into thirteen orders, including several extinct orders. These orders include Carcharhiniformes, which includes blue, tiger, bull, grey reef, blacktip reef, Caribbean reef, blacktail reef, whitetip reef, and oceanic whitetip sharks. These sharks have an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane that protects the eyes during an attack.

Heterodontiformes, also known as bullhead or horn sharks, are commonly referred to as bullhead or horn sharks. Hexanchiformes, such as cow sharks and frilled sharks, are examples from this group. Lamniformes, also known as mackerel sharks, include the goblin shark, basking shark, megamouth shark, thresher sharks, shortfin and longfin mako sharks, and great white shark. They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction.

Orectolobiformes, also known as carpet sharks, include zebra sharks, nurse sharks, wobbegongs, and the whale shark. Pristiophoriformes, sawsharks, are flattened sharks with an elongated, toothed snout used for slashing their prey. Squaliformes, also known as dogfish sharks and roughsharks, are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates. Echinorhiniformes, sometimes given their own order, Echinorhiniformes, includes the prickly shark and bramble shark.

Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw and are constantly replaced throughout life. The shape of teeth depends on the shark's diet, with dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, needle-like teeth for gripping, and pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting.

Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Cartilage is flexible and durable, but is about half the normal density of bone, reducing the skeleton's weight and saving energy. Sharks do not have rib cages, making them easily crushed under their own weight on land.

Jaws of sharks are not attached to the cranium, and the jaw's surface needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae," which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic. Most sharks have eight fins, and they can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.

Dermal denticles, made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body, work as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for swimming muscles and saving energy. Some species of shark have pigmented denticles that form complex patterns like spots (e.g. Zebra shark) and stripes (e.g. Tiger shark), which are important for camouflage and help sharks blend in with their environment.

Sharks have a unique tail shape that provides thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on their tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary significantly between shark species due to their evolution in separate environments. Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed, while porbeagle sharks have a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey. Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, they rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone. Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass. Sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Respiration is essential for sharks, as they extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom-dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.

The respiratory and circulatory process begins when deoxygenated venous blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here, the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta where it branches into afferent branchial arteries. Gas exchange takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent branchial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there venous blood re-enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.

Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or poikilothermic, meaning their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the Lamnidae family maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. Larger species, like the whale shark, conserve their body heat through sheer size when diving to colder depths.

Osmoregulation is another important aspect of sharks' life. They are generally isotonic to their marine environments due to the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), preventing them from surviving in freshwater. Some exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.

Digestion can take a long time, with food moving from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs. Sharks have shorter intestines, achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. Some sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.



Shrimps are a type of crustacean with an elongated body and primarily swimming mode of locomotion, typically belonging to the Caridea or Dendrobranchiata of the decapod order. They are widespread and abundant, with thousands of species adapted to a wide range of habitats. Shrimp are often solitary, but can form large schools during the spawning season. They play important roles in the food chain and are an important food source for larger animals ranging from fish to whales.

The muscular tails of many shrimp are edible to humans, and they are widely caught and farmed for human consumption. Commercial shrimp species support an industry worth 50 billion dollars a year, with the total commercial production of shrimp being nearly 7 million tonnes in 2010. Shrimp farming became more prevalent during the 1980s, particularly in China, and by 2007 the harvest from shrimp farms exceeded the capture of wild shrimp. However, there are significant issues with excessive bycatch when shrimp are captured in the wild and with pollution damage done to estuaries when they are used to support shrimp farming.

Shrimp shrimp are slender with long muscular abdomens and long antennae. They have well developed pleopods (swimmerets) and slender walking legs; they are more adapted for swimming than walking. The distinction between walking and swimming formed the primary taxonomic division into the former suborders Natantia and Reptantia. Members of the Natantia were adapted for swimming while the Reptantia (crabs, lobsters, etc.) were adapted for crawling or walking. Some other groups also have common names that include the word "shrimp," and any small swimming crustacean resembling a shrimp tends to be called one.

Crabs evolved from early shrimp, but do not look like shrimp. They have robust legs and are highly adapted for walking on the seafloor, though they do not walk sideways. Some species have rudimentary pleopods, which give them some ability to swim, and like shrimp they can lobster with their tail to escape predators, but their primary mode of locomotion is walking, not swimming. They have small abdomens, short antennae, and wide and flat carapaces. They use pleopods as intromittent organs or to hold egg broods, not for swimming.

In conclusion, shrimps are a diverse group of crustaceans with elongated bodies, strong walking legs, and a unique adaptation to their habitats. Their widespread distribution and commercial importance make them a valuable food source for larger animals.

The common European shrimp, Crangon crangon, is a decapod shrimp with a body divided into two main parts: the head and thorax, which form the cephalothorax, and a long narrow abdomen. The shell protecting the cephalothorax is called the carapace, which typically surrounds the gills, through which water is pumped by the action of the mouthparts. The rostrum, eyes, whiskers, and legs also issue from the carapace.

Eight pairs of appendages issue from the cephalothorax, with the first three pairs being maxillipeds, which pump water into the gill cavity. The next five pairs are pereiopods, which form ten decapod legs. The remaining four legs are long and slender, used for walking or perching. The muscular abdomen has six segments and has a thinner shell than the carapace. Each segment has a separate overlapping shell, which can be transparent. The first five segments each have a pair of appendages on the underside, which are shaped like paddles and are used for swimming forward. The appendages are called pleopods or swimmerets, and can be used for purposes other than swimming. Some shrimp species use them for brooding eggs, others have gills on them for breathing, and the males in some species use the first pair or two for insemination.

The sixth segment terminates in the telson flanked by two pairs of appendages called the uropods, which allow the shrimp to swim backward and function like rudders, steering the shrimp when it swims forward. Together, the telson and uropods form a splayed tail fan. If a shrimp is alarmed, it can flex its tail fan in a rapid movement, resulting in a backward dart called the caridoid escape reaction (lobstering).

Shrimp are widespread, found near the seafloor of most coasts and estuaries, as well as in rivers and lakes. There are numerous species, with most species being marine, although about a quarter of the described species are found in fresh water. Marine species are found at depths of up to 5,000 meters (16,000 ft) and from the tropics to the polar regions. Although shrimp are almost entirely fully aquatic, the two species of Merguia are semi-terrestrial and spend a significant part of their life on land in mangroves.

Habitats of shrimp vary greatly, with most shrimp living in fairly shallow waters and using their "walking legs" to perch on the sea bottom. Some shrimp, like the cherry shrimp, perch on plant leaves, while others live in deep and dark waters. Some shrimp have a symbiotic relationship with sea slugs and sea cucumbers, helping keep them clear of ectoparasites.

Pistol shrimp stun prey with "sonic booms," producing some of the loudest sounds in the ocean. Some shrimp are omnivorous, but some are specialized for particular modes of feeding. Some shrimp are filter feeders, using their setose legs as a sieve, scraping algae from rocks, and feeding on parasites and necrotic tissue of reef fish they groom. Some species of shrimp can also cannibalize others if other food sources are not readily available. In turn, shrimp are eaten by various animals, particularly fish and seabirds, and frequently host bopyrid parasites.

Mating in freshwater shrimp Caridina ensifera involves the ability of females to store sperm from multiple partners, resulting in progeny with different paternities. Sperm competition and/or pre- and post-copulatory female choice may increase the fitness of progeny by reducing inbreeding depression that usually results from the expression of homozygous deleterious recessive mutations.

Decapods have little agreement among taxonomists concerning the phylogeny of crustaceans. Traditionally, decapods were divided into two suborders: Natantia (or swimmers) and Reptantia (or walkers). The Natantia included shrimp, defined by their well-adapted abdomen and appendages for swimming. The Reptantia included crabs and lobsters, with small abdominal appendages but robust legs well adapted for walking.

However, classifications are now based on clades, and the paraphyletic suborder Natantia has been discontinued. Taxonomic classifications now divide the order Decapoda into the two suborders: Dendrobranchiata for the largest shrimp clade, and Pleocyemata for all other decapods. The Pleocyemata are then divided into half a dozen infra-orders.

The taxonomists De Grave and Fransen recognize four major groups of shrimp: the suborder Dendrobranchiata and the infraorders Procarididea, Stenopodidea, and Caridea. All shrimp of commercial interest belong to the Natantia, and the FAO determines the categories and terminology used in the reporting of global fisheries.

Major shrimp groups of the Natantia include the giant tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon), Penaeid shrimp (Penaeid shrimp or penaeid prawn), Procarididea (Procaris ascensionis), Stenopodidea (boxer shrimp), and ghost or mud shrimp belonging to the infra-order Thalassinidea. The monophyly of the group is not certain, and recent studies have suggested dividing it into two infraorders, Gebiidea and Axiidea.

Shrimps are a diverse group of crustaceans that are not directly related to the decapods, such as lobsters, barnacles, or crabs. They include brine shrimp, clam shrimp, fairy shrimp, tadpole shrimp, lophogastridan shrimp, opossum shrimp, skeleton shrimp, and seed shrimp. These non-decapod shrimp have unique characteristics, such as short legs, a slender tail like a scorpion tail, swimming appendages like leaves, and bivalved carapaces.

Branchiopoda shrimp, which have gills on their feet or mouthparts, are known for their gills. Brine shrimp, belonging to the genus Artemia, live in inland saltwater lakes with high salinities, producing eggs that can be stored in a dormant state and then hatched on demand. Clam shrimp, belonging to the Conchostraca group, have a hinged bivalved carapace that can open and close. Fairy shrimp, belonging to the Anostraca class, have no carapace and swim upside down with their belly uppermost. They are herbivores and eat only algae in plankton.

Tadpole shrimp, belonging to the Notostraca family, are drought-resistant and prey on fairy shrimp and small fish at the bottom of shallow lakes and temporary pools. They can be bisexual, unisexual, or hermaphroditic. Malacostraca shrimp, which comes from the Greek malakós meaning soft and óstrakon meaning shell, are drought-resistant and can be found preying on fairy shrimp and small fish at the bottom of shallow lakes and temporary pools.

Lophogastrida shrimp, marine pelagic shrimp, mostly inhabit deep pelagic waters worldwide. Mantis shrimp, also known as "thumb splitters," grow up to 38 cm (15 in) long and can be vividly colored. Opossum shrimp, belonging to the Mysida order, are widespread in marine waters and are an important source of food for many fish. Skeleton shrimp, sometimes known as ghost shrimp, are amphipods with threadlike slender bodies that allow them to virtually disappear among fine filaments in seaweed.

Ostracod shrimp, which are ostracods, have shells in two parts, similar to those of bivalves or clams.

Seed shrimp, part of the Ostracoda class, are small crustacean species that resemble seeds and have a carapace resembling a clam shell. They can be found in freshwater and terrestrial environments and include carnivores, herbivores, filter feeders, and scavengers. Some shrimp are foot long and have bulging eyes, a flattened tail, and formidable claws equipped with clubs or sharp spikes.

Some non-decapod "shrimp" include mantis shrimp, skeleton shrimp, tadpole shrimp, and brinchiopod shrimp. The history of shrimp production dates back to ancient times, with archaeological evidence dating back to 600 AD for shrimping off the southeastern coast of North America. In the 3rd century AD, Greek author Athenaeus wrote that "of all fish the daintiest is a young shrimp in fig leaves."

In North America, indigenous peoples captured shrimp and other crustaceans using fishing weirs, traps, or nets made from branches and Spanish moss. Early European settlers starved from lack of protein due to the protein-rich coasts. In 1735, beach seines were imported from France, and Cajun fishermen in Louisiana started catching white shrimp and drying them in the sun. In the mid-19th century, Chinese immigrants arrived for the California Gold Rush, catching shrimp local to San Francisco Bay, particularly Crangon franciscorum. These shrimp burrow into the sand to hide and can be present in high numbers without appearing so.

The American shrimping industry began with the development of the otter trawl and the internal combustion engine. Shrimp trawling allowed for the capture of shrimp in huge volumes by dragging a net along the seafloor. Trawling was first recorded in England in 1376 and banned in 1583 by the Dutch. In the 1920s, diesel engines were adapted for use in shrimp boats, allowing shrimp boats to become larger, faster, and more capable.

As shrimp fishing methods industrialized, parallel changes were happening in the way shrimp were processed. Sun dried shrimp were replaced by canneries in the 19th century, and canneries were replaced with freezers in the 20th century. In the 1970s, significant shrimp farming was initiated, particularly in China. The farming accelerated during the 1980s as the quantity of shrimp demand exceeded the quantity supplied, and excessive bycatch and threats to endangered sea turtles became associated with trawling for wild shrimp.

In 2007, the production of farmed shrimp exceeded the capture of wild shrimp.

The world has thousands of shrimp species, but only about 20 are commercially significant. The principal commercial shrimp species include the Dendrobranchiata whiteleg shrimp, giant tiger prawn, akiami paste shrimp, southern rough shrimp, fleshy prawn, banana prawn, and caridea northern prawn. These species are decapods, most belonging to the Dendrobranchiata family, and four are penaeid shrimp.

The most extensively farmed species of shrimp are the Dendrobranchiata whiteleg shrimp, which is the most extensively farmed species. They are small, black-eyed, and red-spotted on their uropods. Most of the harvest is dried, salted, or fermented. Southern rough shrimp, which is easier to catch at night and fished only in waters less than 60 meters deep, is more popular in China.

Fleshy prawn, such as Fenneropenaeus chinensis, is typically trawled in Asia and exported to Western Europe. Banana prawn, also known as Caridea, is primarily trawled in the wild and frozen, with most catches made by Indonesia. Caridea northern prawn, known as Pandalus borealis, is widely fished since the early 1900s in Norway and other countries.

Commercial techniques for catching wild shrimp include otter trawls, seines, and shrimp baiting. However, shrimp trawling can result in high incidental catch rates of non-target species, with discard rates up to 20 pounds for every pound of shrimp. Trawl nets, particularly shrimp trawls, have been identified as sources of mortality for finfish and cetaceans.

The most extensively fished species are the akiami paste shrimp, northern prawn, southern rough shrimp, and giant tiger prawn, accounting for nearly half of the total wild capture. In recent years, the global capture of wild shrimp has been overtaken by the harvest from farmed shrimp.

Shrimp farming is an aquaculture business that focuses on the cultivation of marine shrimp or prawns for human consumption. Commercial shrimp farming began in the 1970s and has grown rapidly, particularly to match market demands of the United States, Japan, and Western Europe. The total global production of farmed shrimp reached more than 1.6 million tonnes in 2003, representing a value of nearly 9 billion U.S. dollars. About 75% of farmed shrimp are produced in Asia, particularly in China, Thailand, Indonesia, India, and Vietnam. The other 25% are produced mainly in Latin America, where Brazil is the largest producer. By 2016, the largest exporting nation is India, followed by Ecuador, Thailand, Indonesia, and China.

The whiteleg shrimp is currently the dominant species in shrimp farming due to its moderately large size, adaptability, and ability to grow fast and uniformly. In China, prawns are cultured along with sea cucumbers and some fish species in integrated multi-trophic systems. The major producer of farmed shrimp is China, with other significant producers being Thailand, Indonesia, India, Vietnam, Brazil, Ecuador, and Bangladesh. Most farmed shrimp is exported to the United States, the European Union, Japan, and other Asian markets.

Human rights abuses have been found in fishing boats operated by Thailand, which are manned with slaves and catch shrimp and fish for the production of fishmeal. Greenpeace has challenged the sustainability of tropical shrimp farming practices, citing the destruction of vast areas of mangroves in several countries and over-fishing of juvenile shrimp from the wild to supply farms.

Shrimp are marketed and commercialized with several issues in mind, such as their high levels of omega-3 fatty acids and low levels of mercury. They are high in calcium, iodine, and protein but low in food energy. A shrimp-based meal is also a significant source of cholesterol, from 122 mg to 251 mg per 100 g of shrimp, depending on the method of preparation. Shrimp consumption is considered healthy for the circulatory system because the lack of significant levels of saturated fat in shrimp means that the high cholesterol content in shrimp improves the ratio of LDL to HDL cholesterol and lowers triglycerides.

Shrimp and other shellfish are among the most common food allergens and are not kosher and thus forbidden in Jewish cuisine. Home aquaria contains various types of shrimp, including freshwater shrimp, Japanese marsh shrimp, cherry shrimp, ghost or glass shrimp, cleaner shrimp, fire shrimp, and harlequin shrimp. Freshwater aquaria variant shrimp come in many colors, such as snow white, cherry, pearl, red, and crystal red bee shrimp.

Shrimp and prawn are common names, not scientific names, and their usage is often confused or reversed in different countries or regions. The terms prawn and shrimp are vernacular or colloquial terms, and their usage is often confused or reversed




Squids are molluscs with an elongated soft body, large eyes, eight arms, and two tentacles in the superorder Decapodiformes. They diverged from other cephalopods during the Jurassic and play an important role in the open water food web. They are rapid swimmers, moving by jet propulsion, and largely locate their prey by sight. They are among the most intelligent of invertebrates, with groups of Humboldt squid having been observed hunting cooperatively.

Squid can change color for camouflage and signaling, with some species being bioluminescent, using their light for counter-illumination camouflage, while many species can eject a cloud of ink to distract predators. They are used for human consumption with commercial fisheries in Japan, the Mediterranean, the southwestern Atlantic, the eastern Pacific, and elsewhere. They have featured in literature since classical times, especially in tales of giant squid and sea monsters.

Squid are members of the class Cephalopoda, subclass Coleoidea, with the squid orders Myopsida and Oegopsida in the superorder Decapodiformes. Two other orders of decapodiform cephalopods are also called squid, but they are taxonomically distinct from squids and differ recognizably in their gross anatomical features. The vampire squid (Vampyroteuthis infernalis) is more closely related to the octopus than to any squid.

The cladogram for squids is not fully resolved, but if it is accepted that Sepiidae cuttlefish are a kind of squid, then the squids, excluding the vampire squid, form a clade as illustrated. All families not included in those orders are in the paraphyletic order "Oegopsida", except Sepiadariidae and Sepiidae that are in the paraphyletic order "Sepiida".

Evolution of squids began in the late Paleozoic (Mississippian) with the divergence of crown coleoids, which were involved in much adaptive radiation at this time. Squids have differentiated from the ancestral mollusc, with the body plan condensed antero-posteriorly and extended dorso-ventrally. The sense organs are highly developed and include advanced eyes similar to those of vertebrates. The ancestral shell has been lost, with only an internal gladius or pen remaining.

Squids are soft-bodied molluscs that evolved to adopt an active predatory lifestyle. They have a long body with a head and foot at one end, which is functionally anterior, leading the animal as it moves through the water. They have eight arms and two distinctive tentacles surrounding their mouth, usually bearing disc-like suckers. These suckers may lie directly on the arm or be stalked, and their rims are stiffened with chitin and may contain minute toothlike denticles.

The main body mass is enclosed in the mantle, which has a swimming fin along each side. The visceral mass, covered by a thin, membranous epidermis, forms a cone-shaped posterior region known as the "visceral hump." The mollusc shell is reduced to an internal, longitudinal chitinous "pen" in the functionally dorsal part of the animal, acting to stiffen the squid and provide attachments for muscles.

On the functionally ventral part of the body is an opening to the mantle cavity, which contains the gills (ctenidia) and openings from the excretory, digestive, and reproductive systems. An inhalant siphon behind the funnel draws water into the mantle cavity via a valve, and the squid uses the funnel for locomotion via precise jet propulsion. In this form of locomotion, water is sucked into the mantle cavity and expelled out of the funnel in a fast, strong jet.

Squid use different kinds of camouflage, such as active camouflage for background matching (in shallow water) and counter-illumination, to protect them from their predators and allow them to approach their prey. The skin is covered in controllable chromatophores of different colors, enabling the squid to match its coloration to its surroundings. The play of colors may also distract prey from the squid's approaching tentacles.

Some mesopelagic squid, such as the firefly squid (Watasenia scintillans) and the midwater squid (Abralia veranyi), use counter-illumination camouflage, generating light to match the downwelling light from the ocean surface. This creates the effect of countershading, making the underside lighter than the upperside.

Counter-illumination is also used by the Hawaiian bobtail squid (Euprymna scolopes), which has symbiotic bacteria that produce light to help the squid avoid nocturnal predators. The squid controls light production by changing the shape of its iris or adjusting the strength of yellow filters on its underside, which presumably change the balance of wavelengths emitted.

Squids have highly developed nervous systems, with a complex brain enclosed in a cartilaginous cranium. They have paired cerebral ganglia above the oesophagus that receive sensory information from the eyes and statocysts, which control the muscles of the mouth, foot, mantle, and viscera. Giant axons up to 1 mm in diameter convey nerve messages with great rapidity to the circular muscles of the mantle wall, allowing synchronous, powerful contraction and maximum speed in the jet propulsion system.

The paired eyes on either side of the head are housed in capsules fused to the cranium, with a globular lens that has a depth of focus from 3 cm (1.2 in) to infinity. The image is focused by changing the position of the lens, as in a camera or telescope, rather than changing the shape of the lens, as in the human eye. Squid adjust to changes in light intensity by expanding and contracting the slit-shaped pupil.

Statocysts are involved in maintaining balance and are analogous to the inner ear of fish. They are housed in cartilaginous capsules on either side of the cranium and provide the squid with information on its body position in relation to gravity, its orientation, acceleration, and rotation, and are able to perceive incoming vibrations. Without the statocysts, the squid cannot maintain equilibrium.

The reproductive system is separate in squids, with a single gonad in the posterior part of the body. Fertilization is external and usually takes place in the mantle cavity of the female. The male has a testis from which sperm pass into a single gonoduct where they are rolled together into a long bundle, or spermatophore. The gonoduct is elongated into a "penis" that extends into the mantle cavity and through which spermatophores are ejected. In shallow-water species of the continental shelf and epipelagic or mesopelagic zones, it is frequently one or both of arm pair IV of males that are modified into hectocotyli. However, most deep-sea squid lack hectocotyl arms and have longer penises; Ancistrocheiridae and Cranchiinae are exceptions.

Deep-water squid have the greatest known penis length relative to body size of all mobile animals, second only to certain sessile barnacles.

Squids, like all cephalopods, are predators and have complex digestive systems. Their mouth is equipped with a sharp, horny beak made of chitin and cross-linked proteins, used to kill and tear prey into manageable pieces. The stomachs of captured whales often have indigestible squid beaks inside. The mouth contains the radula, the rough tongue common to all molluscs except bivalvia, which is equipped with multiple rows of teeth.

The food bolus is moved along the gut by waves of muscular contractions (peristalsis). The long oesophagus leads to a muscular stomach roughly in the middle of the visceral mass. The digestive gland, equivalent to a vertebrate liver, diverticulates here, and both the pancreas empty into the caecum, a pouch-shaped sac where most of the absorption of nutrients takes place. Indigestible food can be passed directly from the stomach to the rectum where it joins the flow from the caecum and is voided through the anus into the mantle cavity.

Cephalopods are short-lived, and in mature squid, priority is given to reproduction. The female Onychoteuthis banksii for example sheds its feeding tentacles on reaching maturity and becomes flaccid and weak after spawning.

The squid mantle cavity is a seawater-filled sac containing three hearts and other organs supporting circulation, respiration, and excretion. Squid have a main systemic heart that pumps blood around the body as part of the general circulatory system, and two branchial hearts. The systemic heart consists of three chambers, a lower ventricle and two upper atria, all of which can contract to propel the blood. The branchial hearts pump blood specifically to the gills for oxygenation, before returning it to the systemic heart.

Buoyancy is mainly provided by a transparent coelom containing ammonium ions for buoyancy. Glass squids in the Cranchiidae family have an enormous transparent coelom containing ammonium ions and occupy about two-thirds the volume of the animal, allowing it to float at the required depth. About half of the 28 families of squid use this mechanism to solve their buoyancy issues.

Squid eggs are large, containing a large amount of yolk to nourish the embryo as it develops directly without an intervening veliger larval stage. The embryo grows as a disc of cells on top of the yolk, forming a yolk sac that eventually forms part of the animal's gut. The dorsal side of the disc grows upwards and forms the embryo, with a shell gland on its dorsal surface, gills, mantle, and eyes. The arms and funnel develop as part of the foot on the ventral side of the disc. The yolk is gradually absorbed as the embryo grows. Some juvenile squid live higher in the water column than do adults. Squids tend to be short-lived; Loligo for example lives from one to three years according to species, typically dying soon after spawning.

In a well-studied bioluminescent species, the Hawaiian bobtail squid, a special light organ in the squid's mantle is rapidly colonized with Aliivibrio fischeri bacteria within hours of hatching. This light-organ colonization occurs in a horizontal manner, such that the hosts acquires its bacterial partners from the environment. The symbiosis is obligate for the squid, but facultative for the bacteria. Once the bacteria enter the squid, they colonize interior epithelial cells in the light organ, living in crypts with complex microvilli protrusions. The bacteria also interact with hemocytes, macrophage-like blood cells that migrate between epithelial cells, but the mechanism and function of this process is not well understood. Bioluminescence reaches its highest levels during the early evening hours and bottoms out before dawn because at the end of each day, the contents of the squid's crypts are expelled into the surrounding environment.

Squid can move about in several different ways. Slow movement is achieved by a gentle undulation of the muscular lateral fins on either side of the trunk which drives the animal forward. A more common means of locomotion providing sustained movement is achieved using jetting, during which contraction of the muscular wall of the mantle cavity provides jet propulsion. Fast jetting is an escape response, making it possible to hyper-inflate the mantle cavity with a larger volume of water than during slow jetting.

Squid are carnivores, and their strong arms and suckers can overwhelm relatively large animals efficiently. Prey is identified by sight or touch, grabbed by the tentacles, brought back to within reach of the arms, and held by the hooks and suckers on their surface. In some species, the squid's saliva contains toxins that act to subdue the prey, which are injected into its bloodstream when the prey is bitten, along with vasodilators and chemicals to stimulate the heart.

The Caribbean reef squid (Sepioteuthis sepioidea) is a marine mammal that uses a complex array of colour changes during courtship and social interactions. Courtship in squid occurs in open water, with the male selecting a female, the female responding, and the transfer of spermatophores to the female. Elaborate changes in body patterning take place in some species in both agonistic and courtship behavior.

Squid eggs are wrapped in a gelatinous coating before continuing to the mantle cavity, where they are fertilized. In Loligo, further coatings are added by the nidimental glands in the walls of the cavity, and the eggs leave through a funnel formed by the arms. The female attaches them to the substrate in strings or groups, the coating layers swelling and hardening after contact with sea water. Loligo sometimes forms breeding aggregations which may create a "community pile" of egg strings. Some pelagic and deep sea squid do not attach their egg masses, which float freely.

Squid mostly have an annual life cycle, growing fast and dying soon after spawning. The diet changes as they grow but mostly consists of large zooplankton and small nekton. In Antarctica, krill is the main constituent of the diet, with other food items being amphipods, other small crustaceans, and large arrow worms. Fish are also eaten, and some squid are cannibalistic.

Squid are an important prey for predators including sharks, sea birds, seals, and whales. Juvenile squid provide part of the diet for worms and small fish. In a single day, a sperm whale can eat 700 to 800 squid, and a Risso's dolphin entangled in a net in the Mediterranean was found to have eaten angel clubhook squid, umbrella squid, reverse jewel squid, and European flying squid, all identifiable from their indigestible beaks. Sperm whales also hunt this species extensively, as does the brown fur seal.

In literature and art, giant squid have featured as monsters of the deep since classical times. They were described by Aristotle (4th century BC) in his History of Animals and Pliny the Elder (1st century AD) in his Natural History. The Gorgon of Greek mythology may have been inspired by squid or octopus, representing the severed head of Medusa.

Squid form a major food resource and are used in cuisines around the world, notably in Japan where it is eaten as ika sōmen, sliced into vermicelli-like strips, as sashimi, and as tempura. Three species of Loligo are used in large quantities, with Todarodes pacificus being the main commercial species. Squid are found abundantly in certain areas and provide large catches for fisheries.



Whales are a diverse group of fully aquatic marine mammals, belonging to the infraorder Cetacea. They belong to the order Cetartiodactyla, which consists of even-toed ungulates. Whales, dolphins, and porpoises are considered whales from a formal, cladistic perspective. The two parvorders of whales, baleen whales (Mysticeti) and toothed whales (Odontoceti), are thought to have had their last common ancestor around 34 million years ago.

Whales are fully aquatic, open-ocean animals that can feed, mate, give birth, suckle, and raise their young at sea. They range in size from the 2.6 meters (8.5 ft) dwarf sperm whale to the 29.9 meters (98 ft) and 190 tonnes (210 short tons) blue whale, which is the largest known animal that has ever lived. The sperm whale is the largest toothed predator on Earth.

Baleen whales have no teeth but have plates of baleen, fringe-like structures that enable them to expel huge mouthfuls of water while retaining the krill and plankton they feed on. They have conical teeth adapted to catching fish or squid and keen hearing, making some species even able to survive even if they are blind. Some species, such as sperm whales, are particularly well adapted for diving to great depths to catch squid and other favoured prey.

Whales evolved from land-living mammals and must regularly surface to breathe air, although they can remain underwater for long periods of time. Some species, such as the sperm whale, can stay underwater for up to 90 minutes. They have blowholes on top of their heads, modified nostrils, and streamlined fusiform bodies with two limbs modified into flippers. Whales produce a great variety of vocalizations, including extended songs of the humpback whale.

Whales are now protected by international law, with the North Atlantic right whales nearly becoming extinct in the twentieth century and the North Pacific grey whale population ranked Critically Endangered by the IUCN. They face threats from bycatch and marine pollution. Whales have been traditionally used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic, depicted in various cultures worldwide, and occasionally featured in literature and film. Whale watching has become a form of tourism around the world.

The word "whale" comes from the Old English hwael, which is derived from Proto-Germanic *hwalaz, meaning "large sea fish." It is sometimes used interchangeably with dolphins and porpoises, acting as a synonym for Cetacea. Six species of dolphins have the word "whale" in their name, collectively known as blackfish: the orca, or killer whale, the melon-headed whale, the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale, and the two species of pilot whales, all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins).

The term "Great Whales" covers those currently regulated by the International Whaling Commission: the Odontoceti family Physeteridae (sperm whales), the Mysticeti families Balaenidae (right and bowhead whales), Eschrichtiidae (grey whales), and some of the Balaenopteridae (Minke, Bryde's, Sei, Blue, and Fin; not Eden's and Omura's whales).

Whales are part of the largely terrestrial mammalian clade Laurasiatheria, which includes dolphins and porpoises, which are not considered whales in the informal sense. The phylogenetic tree shows the relationships of whales and other mammals, with whale groups marked in green.

Cetaceans are divided into two parvorders: Mysticeti (baleen whales) and Odontocetes (toothed whales). Mysticetes, also known as baleen whales, have a pair of blowholes side by side and lack teeth; instead, they have baleen plates which form a sieve-like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin, which they use to filter plankton from the water. Some whales, such as the humpback, reside in the polar regions where they feed on a reliable source of schooling fish and krill.

Mysticetes consist of four families: rorquals (balaenopterids), cetotheriids, right whales (balaenids), and grey whales (eschrichtiids). The main difference between each family of mysticete is in their feeding adaptations and subsequent behavior. Balaenopterids are the rorquals, which rely on their throat pleats to gulp large amounts of water while feeding. Balaenids have large heads, which can make up as much as 40% of their body mass, and much of the head is the mouth. Eschrichtiids have one living member: the grey whale, who are bottom feeders, mainly eating crustaceans and benthic invertebrates.

Odontocetes are the Odontocetes, which are the sperm whales, the sperm whales, and some of the Balaenopteridae.

Odontocetes, also known as toothed whales, are opportunistic creatures that use their well-developed sonar to navigate through the water. They send out ultrasonic clicks using the melon, which bounce back at the whale and are interpreted by the brain. These whales are opportunistic, eating anything they can fit in their throat because they cannot chew. They have well-developed flippers and tail fins to propel themselves through the water, swimming by moving their fore-flippers and tail fin up and down. Whale ribs loosely articulate with their thoracic vertebrae at the proximal end, but they do not form a rigid rib cage.

Odontocetes consist of four families: belugas and narwhals (monodontids), sperm whales (physeterids), dwarf and pygmy sperm whales (kogiids), and beaked whales (ziphiids). The differences between families include size, feeding adaptations, and distribution. Monodontids consist of two species: the beluga and the narwhal, both residing in the frigid arctic and having large amounts of blubber. Belugas, being white, hunt in large pods near the surface and around pack ice, while narwhals, being black, hunt in large pods in the aphotic zone.

Physeterids and Kogiids consist of sperm whales, the largest and smallest odontocetes, and spend a large portion of their life hunting squid. Kogiids are thought to hunt in the photic zone due to their small lungs. Ziphiids consist of 22 species of beaked whales, all sharing a similar hunting style.

Odontocetes also contains porpoises (Phocoenidae) and four or five living families of dolphins: oceanic dolphins (Delphinidae), South Asian river dolphins (Platanistidae), the possibly extinct Yangtze River dolphin (Lipotidae), South American river dolphins (Iniidae), and La Plata dolphin (Pontoporiidae).

Whales are descendants of land-dwelling mammals of the artiodactyl order, related to the Indohyus, an extinct chevrotain-like ungulate. Primitive cetaceans, or archaeocetes, first took to the sea approximately 49 million years ago and became fully aquatic 5-10 million years later. Their features became adapted for living in the marine environment, including a streamlined fish-like body shape, echolocation for low light conditions, and jaw adaptations in rorqual whales. Today, the closest living relatives of cetaceans are the hippopotamuses, which share a semi-aquatic ancestor with the baleen whales (Mysticetes) and toothed whales (Odontocetes).

Whales are torpedo-shaped creatures with non-flexible necks, modified limbs into flippers, and non-existent external ear flaps. They range in size from the 2.6-metre (8.5 ft) and 135-kilogram (298 lb) dwarf sperm whale to the 34-metre (112 ft) and 190-metric-ton (210-short-ton) blue whale. Whales tend to dwarf other cetartiodactyls, with the blue whale being the largest creature on Earth. Some species have female-biased sexual dimorphism, with females being larger than the males.

Odontocetes, such as the sperm whale, possess teeth with cementum cells overlying dentine cells. Mysticetes have large whalebone, as opposed to teeth, made of keratin. Breathing involves expelling stale air from the blowhole, forming an upward, steamy spout, followed by inhaling fresh air into the lungs. Spout shapes differ among species, which facilitates identification. All whales have a thick layer of blubber, which can help with buoyancy, protection, and energy for fasting when migrating to the equator. It can constitute as much as 50% of a whale's body weight.

Whales have a two- to three-chambered stomach similar in structure to terrestrial carnivores. Mysticetes contain a proventriculus as an extension of the oesophagus, which contains stones that grind up food. They also have fundic and pyloric chambers.

Whales are fast swimmers in comparison to seals, which typically cruise at 5-15 kn or 9–28 kilometres per hour (5.6–17.4 mph). The fusing of the neck vertebrae increases stability when swimming at high speeds, but decreases flexibility. When swimming, whales rely on their tail fin to propel them through the water. Flipper movement is continuous, and some species log out of the water, which may allow them to travel faster. Most species have a dorsal fin.

Whales are adapted for diving to great depths, slowing their heart rate to conserve oxygen, and having twice the concentration of myoglobin than haemoglobin. Before going on long dives, many whales exhibit a behavior known as sounding.

The whale ear has specific adaptations to the marine environment. In humans, the middle ear works as an impedance equalizer between the outside air's low impedance and the cochlear fluid's high impedance. In whales, there is no great difference between the outer and inner environments. Instead, whales receive sound through the throat, which passes through a low-impedance fat-filled cavity to the inner ear. The whale ear is acoustically isolated from the skull by air-filled sinus pockets, allowing for greater directional hearing underwater.

Whales have a relatively small eye size, but they retain a good degree of eyesight due to their placement on the sides of their head. They have both rod and cone cells, meaning they can see in both dim and bright light, but lack short wavelength sensitive visual pigments in their cone cells, indicating a more limited capacity for color vision than most mammals. Most whales have slightly flattened eyeballs, enlarged pupils, slightly flattened corneas, and a tapetum lucidum, which allow for large amounts of light to pass through the eye and a very clear image of the surrounding area. They also have glands on the eyelids and outer corneal layer that act as protection for the cornea.

Whales do not have a good sense of smell, as their taste buds are atrophied or missing altogether. However, some toothed whales have preferences between different kinds of fish, indicating some sort of attachment to taste. The presence of the Jacobson's organ indicates that whales can smell food once inside their mouth, which might be similar to the sensation of taste.

Whale vocalization serves several purposes, with some species, such as the humpback whale, communicating using melodic sounds, known as whale song. Humpback whales only have been heard making clicks, while toothed whales use sonar that may generate up to 20,000 watts of sound (+73 dBm or +43 dBw) and be heard for many miles. Captive whales have occasionally been known to mimic human speech, suggesting a strong desire on behalf of the whales to communicate with humans.

Whales emit two distinct kinds of acoustic signals, whistles and clicks. Clicks are quick broadband burst pulses used for sonar, while whistles are narrow-band frequency modulated (FM) signals used for communicative purposes, such as contact calls. Whales are known to teach, learn, cooperate, scheme, and grieve.

Brain size was previously considered a major indicator of the intelligence of an animal, but allometric analysis indicates that mammalian brain size scales at approximately the ⅔ or ¾ exponent of the body mass. Sperm whales have the largest brain mass of any animal on Earth, averaging 8,000 cubic centimetres (490 in3) and 7.8 kilograms (17 lb) in mature males, in comparison to the average human brain which averages 1,450 cubic centimetres (88 in3) in mature males.

Larger whales are also thought to engage in play, with the southern right whale elevating their tail fluke above the water, remaining in the same position for a considerable amount of time, known as "sailing". This behavior is most commonly seen off the coast of Argentina and South Africa.

Whales are aquatic creatures, meaning birth and courtship behaviors differ significantly from terrestrial and semi-aquatic creatures. They deliver babies with the fetus positioned for tail-first delivery to prevent drowning. Whales have mammary glands used for nursing calves, which are weaned off at about 11 months of age. The milk contains high amounts of fat that hastens the development of blubber, making it the consistency of toothpaste. Female whales typically deliver a single calf, and the whale pregnancy/ gestation period lasts longer than the typical 9 month gestation period for humans.

Whales produce one offspring approximately once each year, with female whales being referred to as "cows" who assume full responsibility for the care and training of their young. Male whales, referred to as "bulls," typically play no role in the process of calf rearing. Most baleen whales reside at the poles, so to prevent the unborn baleen whale calves from dying of frostbite, the baleen mother must migrate to warmer calving/mating grounds. They will stay there for a matter of months until the calf has developed enough blubber to survive the bitter temperatures of the poles.

Whales migrate from the Arctic or Antarctic into the tropics during winter and spring, then return to the poles in the warmer summer months to continue growing while the mother can continue eating. One exception is the southern right whale, which migrates to Patagonia and western New Zealand to calve. Whales are conscious breathers, but they cannot afford to become unconscious for long because they may drown. Toothed cetaceans in captivity have been recorded to sleep with one side of their brain at a time, so they may swim, breathe consciously, and avoid both predators and social contact during their period of rest. Sperm whales sleep in vertical postures just under the surface in passive shallow 'drift-dives', generally during the day, leading to the suggestion that whales possibly sleep during such dives.

Ecology
All whales are carnivorous and predatory. Odontocetes, as a whole, mostly feed on fish and cephalopods, followed by crustaceans and bivalves. Mysticetes, as a whole, mostly feed on krill and plankton, followed by crustaceans and other invertebrates. Some species are specialists, such as the blue whale, minke whale, sperm whale, and grey whale. Large whales, such as mysticetes, are not usually subject to predation, but smaller whales, such as monodontids or ziphiids, are. Orcas continuously ram them with their heads to subdue and kill whales, but they are seldom attacked by an individual. Calves are more commonly taken by orcas, but adults can also be targeted.

Terrestrial and pagophilic predators also target small whales, such as the polar bear, which is well adapted for hunting Arctic whales and calves. Whales lessen the chance of predation by gathering in groups, but this means less room around the breathing hole as the ice slowly closes the gap. Polar bear attacks on belugas and narwhals are usually successful in winter but rarely inflict any damage in summer.

Whales play a crucial role in recycling ocean nutrients, acting as an upward biological pump that reverses the presumption that whales accelerate the loss of nutrients to the bottom. Whales defecate at the ocean's surface, their excrement being rich in iron and nitrogen, and their feces remain at the surface where phytoplankton feed off it. Whale carcasses fall to the deep ocean upon death, providing a substantial habitat for marine life. Evidence of whale falls in present-day and fossil records shows that deep sea whale falls support a rich assemblage of creatures, with a global diversity of 407 species, comparable to other neritic biodiversity hotspots.

The degradation of whale carcasses occurs through a series of stages. Initially, moving organisms such as sharks and hagfish scavenge the soft tissues at a rapid rate over a period of months or as long as two years. This is followed by the colonization of bones and surrounding sediments by enrichment opportunists, such as crustaceans and polychaetes, throughout a period of years. Finally, sulfophilic bacteria reduce the bones releasing hydrogen sulfide enabling the growth of chemoautotrophic organisms, which in turn, support other organisms such as mussels, clams, limpets, and sea snails. This stage may last for decades and supports a rich assemblage of species, averaging 185 species per site.

Whaling by humans has existed since the Stone Age, with people from Norway and Japan starting hunting whales around 2000 B.C. Whales are typically hunted for their meat and blubber by aboriginal groups, using baleen for baskets or roofing, and making tools and masks out of bones. The most successful whaling nations at this time were the Netherlands, Japan, and the United States.

Commercial whaling was historically important as an industry throughout the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, with ships from Britain, France, Spain, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Germany sometimes collaborating to hunt whales in the Arctic. Current whaling nations include Norway, Iceland, and Japan, as well as the aboriginal communities of Siberia, Alaska, and northern Canada.

Other threats to whales include cetacean bycatch, cetacean stranding, and marine mammals and sonar.


Tortoises are reptiles belonging to the family Testudinidae and the order Testudines. They have a hard shell to protect themselves from predation and other threats, and can vary in size. Some species, like the Galápagos giant tortoise, grow to over 1.2 meters in length, while others like the Speckled cape tortoise have shells that measure only 6.8 centimetres. Several lineages of tortoises have independently evolved large body sizes in excess of 100 kg.

Tortoises are usually diurnal animals with tendencies to be crepuscular depending on ambient temperatures and are generally reclusive. They are the longest-living land animals in the world, although the longest-living species of tortoise is a matter of debate. Galápagos tortoises are noted to live over 150 years, while an Aldabra giant tortoise named Adwaita may have lived an estimated 255 years. In general, most tortoise species can live 80–150 years.

Tortoises are placid and slow-moving, with an average walking speed of 0.2–0.5 km/h. The usage of the terms turtle, tortoise, and terrapin varies depending on the variety of English being used. The American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists uses "turtle" to describe all species of the order Testudines, while British usage applies the term "tortoises" broadly to all land-dwelling members of the order Testudines.

Australian usage differs from both American and British usage, as land tortoises are not native to Australia and traditionally freshwater turtles have been called "tortoises." Some Australian experts disapprove of this usage, arguing that the term tortoises is better confined to purely terrestrial animals with different habits and needs, which are not found in Australia.

Tortoises are a diverse group of animals with a unique life cycle, including adult male leopard tortoise in South Africa and young African sulcata tortoise. Most species lay small clutch sizes, rarely exceeding 20 eggs, and their incubation period is characteristically long, lasting between 100 and 160.0 days. Egg-laying typically occurs at night, and the mother tortoise covers her clutch with sand, soil, and organic material. The size of the egg depends on the size of the mother and can be estimated by examining the width of the cloacal opening between the carapace and plastron.

Upon completion of the incubation period, a fully formed hatchling uses an egg tooth to break out of its shell and digs to the surface of the nest. They are hatched with an embryonic egg sac, which serves as a source of nutrition for the first three to seven days until they have the strength and mobility to find food. Juvenile tortoises often require a different balance of nutrients than adults, so may eat foods that a more mature tortoise would not.

The number of concentric rings on the carapace can sometimes give a clue to the age of the animal, but growth depends highly on the accessibility of food and water. Some tortoises grow more than one ring per season, and in some cases, due to wear, some rings are no longer visible.

Tortoises generally have one of the longest lifespans of any animal, and some individuals have lived longer than 150 years. They symbolize longevity in some cultures, such as Chinese culture. The oldest tortoise ever recorded was Tu'i Malila, presented to the Tongan royal family by British explorer James Cook shortly after its birth in 1777. Adwaita, an Aldabra giant tortoise brought to India by Lord Wellesley, was believed to be the oldest living animal until its death in 2006. Harriet, a resident at the Australia Zoo from 1987 to 2006, was believed to have been brought to England by Charles Darwin aboard the Beagle and then on to Australia by John Clements Wickham.

Tortoises are sexually dimorphic, with differences between males and females varying across species. Males have longer neck plates, claws, and a curved male plastron for reproduction. Females generally have smaller tails, while males have longer tails. The brain of tortoises is extremely small, with red-footed tortoises lacking the hippocampus, which relates to emotion, learning, memory, and spatial navigation. Studies have shown that tortoises may rely on the medial cortex for emotional actions, an area humans use for decision making.

Tortoises are found in various habitats, including deserts, arid grasslands, scrub to wet evergreen forests, and from sea level to mountains. They are absent from Australasia and live in diverse habitats, including deserts, arid grasslands, scrub to wet evergreen forests, and from sea level to mountains. Giant tortoises are common on large islands due to their ability to survive oceanic dispersals of over 740 km. They can grow to large sizes and become dominant large herbivores on many islands due to their low metabolic rate and reduced need for fresh water compared to mammals.

Today, there are only two living species of giant tortoises: the Aldabra giant tortoise on Aldabra Atoll and the dozen subspecies of Galapagos giant tortoise found on the Galapagos Islands. However, they could be found on nearly every major island group until recently, most of which were wiped out by human arrival. Many of these tortoises are not closely related but are thought to have independently evolved large body size through convergent evolution.

Tortoises are generally considered strict herbivores, feeding on grasses, weeds, leafy greens, flowers, and some fruits. However, hunting and eating of birds has been observed on occasion. Pet tortoises typically require diets based on wild grasses, weeds, leafy greens, and certain flowers. Certain species consume worms or insects and carrion in their normal habitats. Too much protein is detrimental in herbivorous species, and has been associated with shell deformities and other medical problems. Different tortoise species vary greatly in their nutritional requirements.

Tortoises have unique communication methods compared to other reptiles, as they are restricted by their shell and short limbs. Visual communication is not a strong form of communication in tortoises, as they use olfactory cues to determine the sex of other tortoises to find a potential mate. Tactile communication is important in tortoises during combat and courtship, with tortoises using ramming to communicate with other individuals.

Taxonomy for tortoises includes various species such as Aldabra giant tortoise, Alatochelon, Alatochelon myrteum, Aldabrachelys abrupta, Aldabrachelys grandidieri, Astrochelys Gray, Centrochelys Gray, Centrochelys atlantica, Centrochelys burchardi, Centrochelys marocana, Centrochelys robusta, Centrochelys sulcata, and Centrochelys vulcanica. Other extinct species include Chelonoidis Fitzinger, Chelonoidis alburyorum, Chelonoidis carbonarius, Chelonoidis chilensis, Chelonoidis cubensis, Chelonoidis denticulatus, C. dominicensis, Chelonoidis lutzae, Lutz's giant tortoise, Chelonoidis monensis, Chelonoidis niger, Chelonoidis sellovii, Chelonoidis sombrerensis, Cheirogaster Bergounioux, Cheirogaster gymnesica, Cheirogaster schafferi, Chersobius Fitzinger, Cylindraspis Fitzinger, Cylindraspis indica, Cylindraspis borbonica, Cylindraspis inepta, Cylindraspis peltastes, Cylindraspis triserrata, Cylindraspis vosmaeri, Ergilemys Ckhikvadze, Geochelone, Gopherus Rafinesque, Hesperotestudo, Homopus Duméril and Bibron, Indotestudo Lindholm, Kinixys, Manouria Gray, Manouria emys, and Manouria sulcata.

Tortoises also have a variety of other species, such as the elongated tortoise, Forsten's tortoise, and Travancore tortoise. These tortoises use ramming to communicate with each other during combat and courtship, making them an essential part of their ecosystem.

Taxonomy for tortoises includes the fossils of the extinct Ergilemys insolitus, Alatochelon, Alatochelon myrteum, Aldabrachelys abrupta, Aldabrachelys grandidieri, Astrochelys Gray, Centrochelys atlantica, Centrochelys burchardi, Centrochelys marocana, Centrochelys robusta, Chelonoidis lutzae, Chelonoidis monensis, Chelonoidis niger, Chelonoidis sellovii.
